Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 46 (2003) 334–352
On the scarcity value of ecosystem services
Amitrajeet A. Batabyal,a, James R. Kahn,b and Robert V. O’Neillc
aDepartment of Economics, Rochester Institute of Technology, 92 Lomb Memorial Drive,
Rochester, NY 14623-5604, USA bEnvironmental Studies Program and Department of Economics, Washington and Lee University,
Lexington, VA 24450, USA c
Environmental Sciences Division (Emeritus), Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, TN 37831, USA
Received 17 October 2001; revised 20 June 2002
Abstract
In this exploratory paper, we first make a case for considering the scarcity value of ecosystem services in
the analyses of jointly determined ecological–economic systems. Next, we point out that insight into the
scarcity value of an ecosystem service can be gained generally by examining the manner in which the state
of an ecosystem responds to changes in environmental conditions. Following this, we specialize our
discussion to the case of eutrophication in lakes. This leads us to pose and analyze a stochastic control
problem of lake management in which ecological thresholds are salient. Finally, we show that this
stochastic control theoretic framework can be used to obtain a numerical value that is closely related to the
scarcity value of an ecosystem service provided by lakes.
r 2003 Elsevier Science (USA). All rights reserved.
Keywords: Ecosystem service; Ecosystem management; Lake; Scarcity value; Stochastic control
1. Introduction
More than three decades ago, in his classic paper ‘‘Conservation Reconsidered’’, Krutilla [42]
argued for a refocused approach to environmental and natural resources. Rather than being
concerned about the scarcity of exhaustible resources such as fossil fuels and minerals, he argued
that we should focus on the preservation of unique natural environments. In a subsequent book,
Krutilla and Fisher [43] focused on the preservation of selected wilderness areas, such as Hell’s
Canyon, the White Cloud Mountains, and Mineral King Valley.
ARTICLE IN PRESS

Corresponding author.
E-mail address: aabgsh@rit.edu (A.A. Batabyal).
0095-0696/03/$ - see front matter r 2003 Elsevier Science (USA). All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/S0095-0696(02)00040-2
Thirty-five years later, during which time the world population has increased by 79% from 3.49
billion to 6.23 billion1 and humans have transformed the biosphere in a significant manner,2 it is
time to refocus our perspective on conservation once again. In this paper, we contend that our
focus today should not be on the conservation of pristine wilderness areas, per se, but on the
conservation of ecosystem services and on their global distribution.3 Ecosystem services are ‘‘the
conditions and processes through which natural ecosystems, and the species that make them up,
sustain and fulfill human life’’ [17, p. 3]. Examples of such services include the purification of air
and water, the mitigation of floods and droughts, and the detoxification and the decomposition of
wastes.4 After making the case for the importance of the scarcity of ecosystem services, we discuss
an approach to the measurement of its value, first in a general setting, and then in a specific
example.5 We also address the relevance of ecosystem services for the conduct of environmental
policy.
Aquestion that arises now pertains to the source of the scarcity.6 In other words, are ecosystem
services scarce or is it the capacity of an ecosystem to sustain the flow of a service that is scarce? To
answer this question, consider the following two statements from prominent researchers in the
area. Gretchen Daily [19, p. 372, emphasis added] tells us that the ‘‘pace of ecosystem destruction,
and the typical irreversibility thereof on a time scale of interest to humanity, warrants substantial
caution’’. Now, it is clear that the services under consideration in this paper are provided by
ecosystems. Therefore, if the underlying ecosystem is destroyed, then it follows that the services
provided by this ecosystem must either be nonexistent or, at the very least, scarce. Put differently,
if one believes that the problem is primarily one of ‘‘ecosystem destruction’’, then it seems to us
that we ought to be focusing on the scarcity of the services themselves.
Now consider the second statement. Recently, a team of ecologists and economists including
Gretchen Daily, Paul Ehrlich, David Tilman, and Larry Goulder has said that ‘‘[e]cosystem
services are being impaired and destroyed by a wide variety of human activities’’ (emphasis
added).7 According to this standpoint, both outcomes—impairment and destruction—are
pertinent. The conclusion we draw from this second statement is that ecosystem services are
scarce (because of the destruction aspect) and the capacity of an ecosystem to sustain the flow of
certain services is also scarce (because of the impairment aspect). Because (i) both these statements
support the position that it is the services themselves that are scarce and (ii) because the scarcity of
these services is the more serious problem, in the rest of this paper, we shall focus on the scarcity
of ecosystem services.
Although our focus in this paper is on incorporating ecosystem services into the economic
paradigm, the perspective we take is interdisciplinary. The reader should note that traditional
ARTICLE IN PRESS
1See http://www.census.gov/ipc/www/worldpop.html.
2For more on this point, see the individual chapters in [67]. 3Additional support for this contention can be found in [21]. 4
An authoritative source on ecosystem services is Daily [18]. For related issues, see [20]. Aprominent economist’s
perspective on the salience of ecosystem services is contained in [32]. 5The reader should note that the scarcity value of an ecosystem service is not the same as its total value. As such, our
approach in this paper is significantly different from the approach of Costanza et al. [14] who attempted to compute the
total value of the world’s ecosystem services. 6We thank an anonymous referee for raising this point.
7
See http://esa.sdsc.edu/daily.htm.
A.A. Batabyal et al. / Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 46 (2003) 334–352 335
interdisciplinary research in the environmental sciences has concentrated on the development of
linkages between social systems (such as the economy) and ecological systems. This is, in fact, the
major emphasis of the new generation of integrated assessment models that link separate systems
modules, which define the different processes of the various systems. While it may be convenient
to characterize the different systems as inherently distinct, as Perrings [54], Levin et al. [46], and
Batabyal [3] have noted, they are not separate systems. In fact, the social systems are embedded in
the larger environmental system that governs the interaction of all ecological, social, and physical
processes. This is illustrated in Fig. 1, where the left-hand side (LHS) of the diagram illustrates the
conventional viewpoint, and the right-hand side (RHS) depicts a more comprehensive viewpoint,
in which society is part of and embedded within a larger environmental system.
This conventional perspective of the inherent separateness of the two systems may be
responsible for the widely varying policy prescriptions of environmental economists and
ecologists. Economists argue that policy should be conducted by focusing on the most basic
signals in the economic system, i.e., the prices. However, as Costanza and Folke [15] and Goulder
and Kennedy [29] have pointed out, important ecological phenomena that affect the scarcity of
ecosystem services are often not incorporated into prices. In contrast, although ecologists consider
a wide variety of ecological phenomena, they rarely consider the behavioral forces which influence
individual decision making. As such, they tend to focus on command and control policies. Having
said this, it should be noted that ecologists are aware of the complex dynamics of the
environmental system that are typically not analyzable by the calculus-based methods of
economics involving marginal analysis. Moreover, they are also aware of the fact that the
environmental system’s complex dynamics substantially affect the states of the world in which
the economic system operates.8 We believe that by focusing on the scarcity associated with the
ARTICLE IN PRESS
Fig. 1. Two views of the relationships among systems.
8
For more on this, see [44,45].
336 A.A. Batabyal et al. / Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 46 (2003) 334–352
provision of ecosystem services, both economists and ecologists will be able to find a common
ground that can be the basis for meaningful future interdisciplinary research.9
Since the time of Ricardo and Malthus, economists have explicitly discussed the concept
of scarcity. More recently, Hotelling [37] formalized the concept of scarcity and discussed
the mechanism by which a market price serves as a signal of scarcity. Barnett and Morse [2]
extended this work by demonstrating the way in which the increasing price associated with
increased scarcity actually mitigates the scarcity problem. In all this prior work on scarcity, the
focus has been on the scarcity of exhaustible resources, for which well-functioning markets
generally exist. In recent times, concern has mounted about the scarcity of a second type of
resource, namely, environmental resources that provide vital ecosystem services. Because no
market exists for these environmental resources and hence for the associated ecosystem services,
there is no readily available price (or nonprice) signal that can serve as an effective indicator of
scarcity.
In this paper, we explore the importance of the scarcity of ecosystem services and suggest that
by examining the manner in which the state of an ecosystem responds to changes in environmental
conditions, we can come up with a numerical value of the scarcity value of an ecosystem service.
Under some circumstances it may be possible to monetize this scarcity signal, but even when it is
not possible to do this, an appropriate scarcity signal is better than no signal at all.
It is interesting to ask why we have not focused more carefully on the scarcity of ecosystem
services. During the 1970s, Congress marked the citizenry’s concern for the environment by
passing the landmark Clean Air and Clean Water Acts (1972, 1977). In those days, we viewed
environmental problems as local problems involving the use (or misuse) of local environmental
resources. Although we recognized that unique environmental resources may have global value,
we viewed the environment as a set of independent parts. As noted in [43], this view of the
environment has been central in the subsequent development of techniques to value the
environment.10
The approach of the discipline of environmental economics to valuing the services of preserved
environmental resources—see [26,29]—has been to use revealed preference techniques such as the
travel cost and hedonic pricing models or stated preference models such as contingent valuation
or conjoint analysis to obtain a measure of the willingness to pay (WTP) for the relevant
environmental resource. This WTP measure is supposed to be similar to the consumer surplus
(CS) measure associated with market goods. If market goods are indeed sacrificed in order to
implement environmental policy, then it makes sense to try to measure these values by means of a
common metric.
However, before we become sanguine about the way in which we measure the value of
environmental resources, let us ask ourselves a more basic question about the underlying values.
Each year, thousands of ‘‘Principles of Economics’’ students are taught that economics is the
study of the efficient allocation of scarce resources. Therefore, if we are to optimally allocate our
environmental resources, we must understand the scarcity value of these environmental resources.
As noted in Daily et al. [21], a critical aspect of this allocation process is to ensure the maintenance
of vital ecosystem services. An examination of the scarcity value of ecosystem services is a salient
ARTICLE IN PRESS
9For additional perspectives on the valuation of ecosystem services, see Ecosystems 3(1) 2000. 10For a more expanded discussion of this point, see Ecosystems 3(1) 2000.
A.A. Batabyal et al. / Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 46 (2003) 334–352 337
problem because environmental resources and ecosystem services are essential for the
maintenance and the productivity of the economic system. However, unlike exhaustible resources
such as fossil fuels and minerals, ecosystem services are largely independent of the market system
and hence their scarcity value is not incorporated into market prices.
The economic valuation techniques listed above can do an adequate job of measuring the
scarcity of environmental resources with regard to the manner in which these resources contribute
directly to the production of economic goods (such as the impact of air pollution on agricultural
productivity, recreation, human health, and the general quality of life (altruistic values, bequest
values, existence values, and so on)). If these were the only values associated with environmental
resources then we could focus on further refining these revealed and stated preference techniques
and use the knowledge generated by the implementation of these techniques to guide
environmental policy for local and global environmental problems.
Even if the expressed WTP is a true measure of the current generation’s willingness to trade-off
ecosystem services for market goods, this WTP will not measure scarcity in a manner that is
consistent with the way in which price measures the scarcity of a market natural resource such as a
fossil fuel or a mineral. This is because the market price of an exhaustible resource will
incorporate the future scarcity of this resource. Why? Because a supplier of the resource must be
indifferent between selling the resource now and selling it in a future time period. If scarcity is
increasing, then the seller will anticipate a higher future price and withhold the resource from
today’s market. This, of course, will increase today’s price until the seller is indifferent between
selling today and in the future. In other words, the opportunity cost of not having the resource
available in future time periods is incorporated into today’s price. Neither stated preference
techniques such as contingent valuation nor revealed preference techniques such as hedonic
pricing are capable of incorporating this opportunity cost into today’s WTP.
In addition, if we look at the environment from a systems perspective,11 then another important
source of scarcity arises and revealed and stated preference techniques are ill-equipped to measure
this scarcity value. If we accept the propositions that environmental quality contributes to the
stability of ecosystems and that the stability of ecosystems in turn contributes to social welfare
(because social systems are contained within and constrained by ecosystems), then, independent of
the direct use of the environment, there must be a scarcity value associated with the degradation
of environmental quality.
2. The importance of ecosystem services
Barnett and Morse [2] have argued that substitution is one of the major factors
mitigating scarcity. As resources of a particular type become scarce, their prices rise and
substitutes for these resources develop. Scarcity is mitigated by this substitution process, and it is
often argued that this substitution process can even ensure sustainability in the sense of
Brundtland [10]. For example, a clear suggestion emanating from the analysis in Hartwick [30] is
that one can achieve sustainability as long as the scarcity rents accruing to exhaustible natural
ARTICLE IN PRESS
11Recently, Simon Levin has suggested that we view ecosystems and the biosphere as complex adaptive systems. For
more on this line of thinking, see [44,45].
338 A.A. Batabyal et al. / Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 46 (2003) 334–352
resources12 are reinvested in other forms of capital, such as human capital and human-made
capital.
Despite the optimism associated with the literature on exhaustible resources, scarcity, and
sustainability, there is no reason to believe that any of these scarcity reducing or sustainability
generating phenomena are applicable to environmental resources. Increasing scarcity cannot
trigger substitution away from ecosystem services because ecosystem services have no market
price to trigger the scarcity signal. Moreover, one can argue that while human and human-made
capital are effective substitutes for exhaustible natural resources, there is no reason to believe that
human or human-made capital can be effective substitutes for either environmental resources in
the production of ecosystem services, or for ecosystem services in their provision of system
stability. Moreover, ecosystem ‘‘services operate in intricate and little-explored ways that would
be very difficult to substitute for using technology’’ [19, p. 369].
13 Consequently, the most critical
factor in sustainability is likely to be the maintenance of adequate stocks of environmental
resources to ensure an adequate flow of ecosystem services. In sum, development paths that
consume environmental resources intensively are likely to be unsustainable and development
paths that conserve key environmental resources are likely to be sustainable.
It has rightly been said that ‘‘natural ecosystems help to support societyy’’ [49, p. 11]. To this
end, one can point to many real-world examples to make the case that ecosystem services are
important for humans. For example, the annual floods of the Nile River replenish the productivity
of the Nile flood plain soils and also provide the basis for an agricultural system that dates back
several thousand years. The construction of the Aswan Dam has ended these annual floods and it
has trapped the important sediments upstream of the dam, thereby impoverishing Egyptian
agriculture and leading to massive migration into Cairo, with all the problems associated with
urban poverty and unemployment. Consider a second example from the United States. Land-use
decisions in the midwestern states have led to the loss of flood protection services provided by
upstream wetlands. This loss has been considered to be a major factor in the recent intensive
flooding of the Mississippi River and its tributaries. In particular, because the underlying systems
involved are complex and adaptive [44,45], these problems may be more difficult than is commonly
understood. Specifically, the problem of the loss of ecosystem services is likely to be complicated
by phenomena for which small changes in economic activities—such as a small change in either
the level of pollution or the pattern of land use—lead to large changes in the pertinent
environmental systems.14
Agood example of these nonmarginal responses can be found in the problem of greenhouse gas
emissions. These emissions have been held responsible for causing (or at least intensifying) the
cyclic El Nin˜o and the La Nin˜a climatic fluctuations that have profound implications for social
welfare. In this example, marginal increases in carbon dioxide emissions lead to marginal increases
in global temperature, but eventually a threshold is crossed and this leads directly to massive
ARTICLE IN PRESS
12This paper distinguishes between two types of natural capital. The first type is the exhaustible resource such as a
fossil fuel or a mineral resource. The second type of natural capital is the environmental resource, and this type includes
ecosystem or physical systems such as forests and the ozone layer that provide essential services such as carbon
sequestration, nutrient cycling, and protection from ultraviolet radiation. 13This point is also made in [31]. 14For more on this, see [35,55,61].
A.A. Batabyal et al. / Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 46 (2003) 334–352 339
warming in an area of the Pacific Ocean and to the destabilizing phenomena associated with El
Nin˜o and La Nin˜a.
15
An ideal treatment of the scarcity value of ecosystem services would develop a functional
relationship between the level of ecosystem services and the value that these services provide.
While this is the ultimate goal of our research, in this paper we attempt to develop some insight
into the value of ecosystem services by measuring their scarcity value when critical ecological
thresholds are crossed as a result of the continuance of economic activities.
3. Nonlinearity and the instability of ecological systems
Insight into the stability of ecosystems can be obtained by examining the nonlinear phenomena
that govern the behavior of such systems. Changes in external conditions (climate change, loss of
species diversity, etc.) lead to a gradual and, on occasion, even linear change in the state of some
ecosystems. Other ecosystems may be relatively unresponsive to changes in external conditions,
responding only when conditions approach or cross key thresholds. However, as Carpenter et al.
[12] and Scheffer et al. [64] have pointed out, it is important to recognize that for certain
environmental conditions, the response curve for many ecosystems is such that these systems have
two alternate stable states demarcated by an unstable equilibrium that marks the boundary
between the so-called ‘‘basins of attraction’’ of the two stable states. Examples of such stable
states include oligotrophic and eutrophic states in lakes [11,48] and woody and grass dominated
states in the case of rangelands [25,64]. This last (and important) class of ecosystems typically
cannot move from one stable state to another smoothly. Instead, when external conditions change
sufficiently so that a threshold is crossed, there is a ‘‘catastrophic’’ transition from one stable state
to the other. This state of affairs tells us two things. First, ‘‘catastrophic shifts occur typically
unannounced, and ‘early-warning signals’ of approaching catastrophic change are difficult to
obtain’’ [64, p. 591]. Second, irreversible ecological thresholds can be crossed even when human
actions result in small and gradual changes to the environment.
If there is only a single basin of attraction then an ecosystem will settle back into the same state
after the occurrence of one or more stochastic events. However, consistent with the discussion in
the previous paragraph, if there are alternate stable states, then the likelihood of a move from one
state to another depends on the size of the basin of attraction associated with the first state.
Specifically, if the size of the basin of attraction associated with this state is small, then even a
minor perturbation can result in an ecosystem moving to a new equilibrium state. For example,
competition by desert scrub may prevent the recovery of overgrazed arid rangelands. In this case,
overgrazing permits the arid rangeland to be invaded by desert scrub and this invasion eventually
results in the rangeland becoming a stable desert ecosystem.
Kahn and O’Neill [39] have used simple dynamic models and have demonstrated that ordinary
types of ecological interactions (such as the interrelationships between competitors or those
between predators and prey) can lead to nonlinearities that drastically affect the nature of an
ecological equilibrium. If this is indeed the case, then nonlinearities in the ecological system will
imply that nonlinearities in the economic system are much more likely to occur than most
ARTICLE IN PRESS
15See [41] for an interesting related issue.
340 A.A. Batabyal et al. / Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 46 (2003) 334–352
economists would ordinarily believe. Previous studies in environmental economics that have
focused on nonlinearities [43] have associated them with large and discrete activities—such as
damming a major river or massive mining projects in wilderness areas—that tend to be more
isolated in nature.
Following the work of O’Neill et al. [52,53], and others, one can certainly provide powerful
conceptual arguments that nonlinearities are likely to be important in the functioning of
environmental systems. However, does the real-world evidence support the existence of such
nonlinear dynamics in biological and environmental systems? The recent work of Scheffer et al.
[64]—who provide helpful examples involving deserts, lakes, oceans, and rangelands—tells us that
the answer to this question is an unambiguous yes. At the smallest scale, it is generally accepted
that a type of nonlinear response causes periodic bursting in nerve cells [59] and rapid and
transient behavior in microbial colonies [63,71]. At the ecosystem scale, Jones [38] argues that
outbreaks of pests follow nonlinear dynamics. At the global scale, Crowley and North [16]
demonstrate the existence of a fold catastrophe16 in very simple models of ice cap dynamics and
they argue that this accounts for rapid climatic changes in glacial–interglacial transitions.
The most conspicuous threshold at the landscape scale occurs at the ecotone. The ecotone is the
tension zone where one vegetation type, for instance a grassland, changes suddenly into another
such as a forest [24]. These sharp transitions have long attracted the attention of ecologists
[51,60,62]. Changes occur as disturbances destroy the existing vegetation and open the
opportunity for new vegetation to take over the site. With economic activities such as grazing,
the probabilities shift slightly in favor of a new vegetation type.
As with other threshold phenomena, some ecotones are simply explained by sharp
discontinuities in the abiotic environment. The simplest example of this is seen on mountains
in the Northern Hemisphere, where the northern (colder) slope differs in vegetation from the
adjacent southern (warmer) slope, yielding a sharp ecotone along the ridgeline. But as with other
nonlinear threshold phenomena, some ecotones occur as sharp transitions even along gentle
gradients in abiotic factors [33]. These ecotones are sharp because of competitive interactions
within the system [22] and because a small change in the environment causes the system to move
to a new stable state. As environmental changes occur over time, the ecotone responds by moving
in space [9,23,65]. Pollen records indicate that past climate change has set off this kind of
dynamics and caused a slow (5–200 km per century) migration of ecotones. The Climate Change
2001 report [70] indicates that biomes may migrate 150–500 km north due to global warming.
The concern for nonlinear responses is also motivated by the broad spectrum of stresses being
imposed on ecosystems by society [28]. Average temperature now is increasing faster than it has in
the last 10,000 years [1]. The human economy uses 40% of net primary production [69]. Natural
vegetation has been fragmented, making it more difficult to recover from natural disturbances
[27]. The ozone shield has been damaged. Soil erosion is nearly universal, with soil loss rates
significantly exceeding soil formation rates [57]. More than 50% of the world’s tropical forests
have been cut and the current rate of deforestation exceeds 168; 000 km2 per year [28]. Some
impacts, such as species loss, are irreversible [43] and technology is not available to repair largescale damage [50].
ARTICLE IN PRESS
16For more on fold catastrophes, see [38].
A.A. Batabyal et al. / Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 46 (2003) 334–352 341
Phillips [56] points out the importance of the ratio between the time required to recover from a
disturbance and the time interval between successive disturbances. He suggests that a ratio of 1:10
is required for sustainability. The multiple stresses currently being imposed on the global system
are both increasing the frequency and intensity of disturbances and decreasing the ability of
ecosystems to recover. This twofold impact substantially increases the risk of threshold
phenomena and of irreversibilities.
4. Measuring scarcity value
In this and the next section, we shall focus on lakes as our prototypical ecosystem. However, the
reader should note that the ideas discussed here apply to many other ecosystems as well.17 Fig. 2
shows the manner in which the equilibrium states of a lake ecosystem vary with changes in the
amount of phosphorus in the lake. The horizontal axis denotes phosphorus in the lake and the
vertical axis depicts the three possible states of the lake. As Maler [48] has noted, phosphorus
occurs naturally in lakes. Even so, sewage, runoff from fertilizers—which contains phosphorus—
used in agriculture, and other human actions often result in the deposition of significant
additional amounts of phosphorus into lakes.
The pristine state of most lakes is one of clear water with significant amounts of submerged
vegetation.18 This clear water state is typically a stable state and a lake in such a state is said to be
oligotrophic. In Fig. 2, this state is represented by the upper branch of the lake ecosystem
ARTICLE IN PRESS
State of Lake
Shift to
Oligotrophic
State
Oligotrophic
State
(upper branch)
Shift to
Eutrophic
State
Eutrophic
State 
(lower branch)
Phosphorus Level
Et
Ot
I II
Fig. 2. Phosphorus deposition and alternate states of a lake. (Adapted from Fig. 2 in [11] and Fig. 2 in [64]).
17Scheffer et al. [64] have shown that the ideas discussed here apply not only to lakes, but also to coral reefs, deserts,
oceans, and woodlands. 18For more on this and related issues, see [11,64] and the many references cited in these two papers.
342 A.A. Batabyal et al. / Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 46 (2003) 334–352
response curve. The submerged vegetation of an oligotrophic lake, and hence the oligotrophic
lake itself, provide a number of valuable ecosystem services. Specifically, the submerged
vegetation (i) reduces phosphorus in the water column, (ii) protects phytoplankton grazers such as
the Daphnia and hence prevents the growth of phytoplanktons, and (iii) reduces sediment
suspension in the water. As a result of the provision of these services, the lake stays clear and,
from an anthropocentric perspective, this oligotrophic lake permits the conduct of activities such
as fishing, recreation, and water sports.
When phosphorus is deposited into this lake, initially, green algae begin to grow. As more and
more phosphorus is added, and this is shown in Fig. 2 by the arrowheads pointing in the
rightward direction on the upper branch of the response curve, the water continues to be clear
until a critical threshold is crossed. This threshold which marks the boundary of the oligotrophic
state is denoted Ot in Fig. 2. What is important to note here is that once this critical threshold is
crossed, the water quality of the lake suddenly changes from clear to turbid. This turbid state is
known as the eutrophic state and this state is shown in Fig. 2 by the lower branch of the lake
ecosystem response curve. The dashed line between Ot and Et denotes the third and unstable
equilibrium. The state change from oligotrophic to eutrophic is denoted in Fig. 2 by the dashed
arrow pointing in the downward direction from the threshold Ot: The reader should note that as
the lake moves closer to Ot along the upper branch of the response curve, the submerged
vegetation in the lake gradually begins to die out and hence the services provided by this
vegetation become increasingly scarce. In fact, beyond the threshold Ot; these services are either
extremely scarce or altogether nonexistent.
What does this state of affairs mean for lake management? Clearly, given a choice between the
more productive oligotrophic state and the less productive eutrophic state, a lake manager will
prefer to keep a lake in the oligotrophic state. However, given that a lake is in the eutrophic state,
this individual will want to take those actions that will move the lake under study to the
oligotrophic state. In this context, it is relevant to note that a mere reduction of phosphorus
concentrations is generally insufficient to restore the lake to the clear water state. Indeed, as
Scheffer et al. [64, p. 592] have noted, ‘‘the restoration of clear water happens at substantially
lower [phosphorus] levels than those at which the collapse of the vegetation occurred’’. So, if a
lake manager attempts to move an eutrophic lake back to the oligotrophic state, then (s)he will
generally have to contend with the fact that this lake demonstrates hysteresis.
19 In other words,
the lake will revert back to the oligotrophic state if and only if phosphorus concentrations are
altered to such an extent that the lake moves beyond the boundary of the eutrophic state. With
regard to Fig. 2, this means that it will be necessary to take actions to move the lake leftward from
the point marked II all the way past the boundary of the eutrophic state marked Et: Only then will
the lake shift back to the oligotrophic state and this is shown in Fig. 2 by the upward pointing
dashed arrow from the threshold marked Et:
20 Viewed in a different way, submerged vegetation
ARTICLE IN PRESS
19As noted in [48, p. 655], hysteresis is the failure of a phenomenon to reverse itself when its underlying cause is
reversed. The reader should note that the kinds of lakes that we are focusing on fall into the reversible or hysteretic
category. It is generally not possible to reverse the process of eutrophication in irreversible lakes. For more on this, see
[11].
20These thresholds are also known as attractors and as bifurcation points.
A.A. Batabyal et al. / Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 46 (2003) 334–352 343
will gradually emerge in the lake and this will result, eventually, in the provision of the valuable
ecosystem services mentioned earlier.
Aconcept that is now very important in discussions of the management of ecosystems is
resilience. In this context, resilience refers to ‘‘the amount of disturbance that can be sustained [by
an ecosystem] before a change in system control or structure occurs’’ [36, p. 50].
21 From the
standpoint of lake management it is important to note that the productive oligotrophic and the
unproductive eutrophic states can both be resilient. As such, it is important to comprehend what
lake management means from a resilience perspective. The basic idea is stated succinctly by
Carpenter et al. [12, p. 768]: ‘‘For a lake in the clear-water state, the challenge for managers is to
increase or maintain the resilience of the clear-water state. For lakes in the turbid state, the
challenge is to break down the resilience of the turbid state or shift the lake into the clear-water
state’’.
In more technical parlance, we would say that the resilience of a state of the lake is the size of
the stability domain associated with that state. Therefore, if the lake under study is in the
oligotrophic state, then a manager ought to take those actions that ensure that the lake stays in
the stability domain of this oligotrophic state and does not cross the threshold (Ot in Fig. 2) and
shift to the stability domain of the eutrophic state. Conversely, if the lake is in the eutrophic state,
then actions ought to be taken so that the lake crosses the threshold (Et in Fig. 2) and moves out
of the stability domain of this undesirable state into the stability domain of the desirable
oligotrophic state.
Asmall literature in ecological economics [4,5,7] has documented the salience of thresholds in
the behavior of dynamic and stochastic ecosystems. Despite this, to the best of our knowledge,
there are very few formal models that explicitly analyze the connections between thresholds and
ecosystem management. Consequently, we now adapt a model in Batabyal and Beladi [6] and
present a preliminary analysis of optimal lake management in the presence of thresholds.
Before we proceed to the formal analysis, let us recall two points from our discussion thus far.
First, ecosystem services provided by lakes are essential for the productivity of the economic
system. For instance, in the Great Lakes region of the United States, the economic system
includes productive farm lands and the associated agricultural activities on these lands. Second,
because water clarity contributes to lake productivity and the productivity of lakes contributes to
social welfare, one expects a scarcity value to be associated with a decline in lake water clarity. In
the context of lakes, the pertinent ecosystem services include the many services provided by
submerged vegetation, pollution dilution, recreation, and the productivity of lakes is, at least in
part, a function of these ecosystem services.22 Therefore, an increase in phosphorus deposition in
the lake under study leads to a decrease in the provision of the above mentioned ecosystem
services and this decrease leads to a decline in lake productivity.
ARTICLE IN PRESS
21 It is important to note that there are two meanings of resilience in the ecology literature. The sense in which we are
using this term is due originally to Holling [34]. The other meaning of resilience is due to Pimm [58] and this
interpretation focuses on stability near an equilibrium steady state, and resistance to disturbance and the speed of
return to the equilibrium are used to measure this alternate notion of resilience. Recently, Holling [35] has referred to
the Pimm [58] notion of resilience as ‘‘engineering resilience’’ and he has referred to his original (1973) notion of
resilience as ‘‘ecological resilience’’. As indicated earlier, in this paper, the focus is on ecological and not on engineering
resilience. 22For more on this see [12, p. 768].
344 A.A. Batabyal et al. / Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 46 (2003) 334–352
With regard to Fig. 2, beyond the threshold Ot; our lake has changed its state and consequently
its character is altered in a significant manner. In the resulting eutrophic state, the many ecosystem
services such as pollution dilution are either not being provided at all or being provided at a very
diminished level. Put differently, the capacity of the lake to, say, reduce phosphorus in the water
column is minimal at the threshold Ot and zero or close to zero on the lower branch of the
ecosystem response curve. Consequently, on the lower branch of the ecosystem response curve,
the phosphorus reducing service of the lake is truly scarce. Therefore, in our subsequent
mathematical analysis we expect to identify a numerical value that is closely related to the scarcity
value of this phosphorus reducing service as the level of phosphorus deposition in the lake rises,
thereby moving the lake closer to the threshold Ot:
5. Optimal lake management, thresholds, and a scarcity value
5.1. Preliminaries
In the absence of regulation, sewage, and runoff from fertilizers used in agriculture results in
ongoing phosphorus deposition in the lake under study.23 This deposition of phosphorus over
time eventually results in the steady-state level of the phosphorus reducing capacity of the
submerged vegetation in the lake declining to zero. This unacceptably low level corresponds to
some level of phosphorus deposition that effectively moves the lake beyond threshold Ot and into
the eutrophic state (lower branch in Fig. 2). Let us denote this low level by LR ¼ 0: With regard to
Fig. 2, LR is somewhere to the right of the point marked II on the ecosystem response curve. As
noted in [11,13], the lake manager would like to use a control variable V (phosphorus deposition
reduction, fish biomass reduction, sediment treatment, hypolimnetic oxygenation, biomanipulation, etc.) to raise the level of the submerged vegetation’s capacity to reduce phosphorus in the
water column from zero to LR þ gV; where g40 is a parameter. In terms of the two resilient states
of the lake, our manager would like to use the control V to move the lake from the eutrophic to
the oligotrophic state.
Carpenter et al. [11], Lewandrowski et al. [47], and others have rightly pointed out that
ecosystem management is a costly activity. Consistent with this viewpoint, we suppose that the use
of the control variable V for management purposes results in costs to society. We denote the cost
of using the control V by the differentiable cost function cðVÞ; and consistent with standard
assumptions in economic theory (see [68, pp. 54–67]), we suppose that this cost function is
increasing and convex. In symbols, this means that c0
ðVÞ40 and c00ðVÞ40:
Let XðtÞ¼fLðtÞ  LR  gVg denote the deviation of the submerged vegetation’s capacity to
reduce phosphorus in the lake from the steady-state level LR ¼ 0; when the manager’s control
variable is V: To account for the stochastic nature of the submerged vegetation’s phosphorus
reducing capacity,24 we model the evolution of the deviation XðtÞ over time with a stochastic
ARTICLE IN PRESS
23To keep the mathematics manageable, in the rest of this section, we shall focus on a single ecosystem service,
namely, the phosphorus reducing service provided by the submerged vegetation in lakes. However, the reader should
note that as we have pointed out at various points in the paper, lakes typically provide a multitude of ecosystem services
to society. 24For more on the ways in which ecological uncertainty affects the ecosystem management problem, see [11].
A.A. Batabyal et al. / Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 46 (2003) 334–352 345
differential equation.25 Now, recall that the eutrophic state of a lake is a resilient state. Moreover,
as discussed in Section 4, the lake in the eutrophic state also displays hysteresis. This tells us that
the size of the stability domain associated with this eutrophic state is such that moderate attempts
to move the lake to the oligotrophic state will only result in the lake flipping back into this
unproductive state. Given this state of affairs, we expect the deviations XðtÞ to exhibit a certain
degree of mean reversion over time. Therefore, we suppose that the evolution of XðtÞ can be
described by the Ornstein–Uhlenbeck process.26. This means that XðtÞ satisfies the linear
stochastic differential equation
dX ¼ ZX dt þ s dW; ð1Þ
where Z is the speed of reversion, s is the variance parameter, and dW is the increment of a
standard Brownian motion process. We wish to study the steady-state behavior of the deviation of
the submerged vegetation’s phosphorus reducing capacity from the steady-state level LR ¼ 0:
From Proposition 5.1 in Karlin and Taylor [40, p. 219], it follows that the stationary probability
distribution function of Xð
Þ is
fNðxÞ ¼
ffiffiffiffiffiffiffi
Z
ps2
r
exp Zx2
s2
 : ð2Þ
Suppose that our lake manager has identified level I (this corresponds to threshold Et in Fig. 2)
on the ecosystem response curve as the minimum acceptable level of the phosphorus reducing
capacity of the submerged vegetation in the lake under study, given that this lake is currently in the
eutrophic state. Viewed differently, this minimum acceptable level of the phosphorus reducing
capacity is also the maximum acceptable level of phosphorus deposition in this lake, given that the
lake is presently in the eutrophic state. The reader should note that it is necessary to move the lake
from somewhere to the right of point II on the response curve to point I on this response curve
(see Fig. 2) because the lake displays hysteresis. If the lake were reversible and not hysteretic, then
to move the lake back to the oligotrophic state, the manager would not have to move the lake all
the way to point I.27 The manager’s task now is to compute the probability that the phosphorus
reducing capacity of this lake will actually stay above level I on the response curve when the
control is V:
5.2. The optimization problem
To compute the above probability, let fðlÞ dl ¼ Probfstationary phosphorus reducing
capacity Aðl; l þ dlÞg: This probability is the same as
Probfstationary value of deviation Aðl  LR  gV; l  LR  gV þ dlg: ð3Þ
Using Eq. (2), the probability in Eq. (3) can be simplified. This yields
fðlÞ ¼
ffiffiffiffiffiffiffi
Z
ps2
r
exp Z
s2
 ðl  LR  gVÞ
2 n o: ð4Þ
ARTICLE IN PRESS
25X denotes the random variable and x denotes a particular realization of X: 26For more on the Ornstein–Uhlenbeck process, see [40, pp. 170–173]; [66, pp. 524–534] 27See [11,64] for a more expanded discussion of these issues.
346 A.A. Batabyal et al. / Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 46 (2003) 334–352
We can now state an objective for our manager. This manager chooses the control V; incurs
cost cðVÞ; and maximizes the probability that the phosphorus reducing capacity of the lake is
above level I, the minimum acceptable level. As indicated in Section 5.1, this means moving the
lake in the leftward direction from somewhere to the right of point II on the response curve to the
point marked I on this response curve (see Fig. 2). The reader will note that this is an ecological–
economic objective. This is because the manager is choosing V to maximize the likelihood that the
phosphorus reducing capacity of the lake will be in the desirable range (an ecological criterion), at
economic cost cðVÞ: Formally, our manager solves
max
V
Z N
I
ffiffiffiffiffiffiffi
Z
ps2
r
exp Z
s2
 ðl  LR  gVÞ
2

  n o dl  cðVÞ: ð5Þ
Now making the substitution b ¼ l  LR  gV; our manager’s optimization problem can be
written as
max
V
Z N
ILRgV
ffiffiffiffiffiffiffi
Z
ps2
r
exp Zb2
s2

   
   db  cðVÞ: ð6Þ
The first-order necessary condition to this problem is
g
ffiffiffiffiffiffiffi
Z
ps2
r
exp Z
s2
 ðI  LR  gVÞ
2

  n o ¼ c0
ðVÞ ð7Þ
and the second-order sufficient condition is ffiffiffiffiffiffiffi
Z
ps2
r
exp Z
ps2
 ðI  LR  gVÞ
2 n o 2g2Z
s2
 ðI  LR  gVÞ
 
  c00ðVÞp0: ð8Þ
The first-order necessary condition (Eq. (7)) tells us that optimality requires the manager to choose the
control V; so that the marginal economic cost to society of this control (the RHS of Eq. (7)) is equal to the
marginal increase in the likelihood that the phosphorus reducing capacity of the lake will be above the
minimum acceptable level I (the LHS of Eq. (7)). Let V be the solution to Eq. (7). In order to shed light
on the scarcity value of our lake’s phosphorus reducing capacity, we now ask the following question: What
is the steady-state probability that the phosphorus reducing capacity of the lake will be above the minimum
acceptable level I? Put differently, what is the stationary probability that this lake’s phosphorus reducing
service will continue to be provided to society? If we know g; Z; s2; LR; and the level I, then we can answer
the above question by simply substituting V into the first part of the maximand in Eq. (5). We will use
this fact in the next section. For the time being, note that, in general, the nonlinear equation (7) cannot be
solved explicitly for V: However, for some specifications of the cost function cðVÞ; this equation can be
solved explicitly. Consequently, to illustrate our approach, we now discuss such a case.
5.3. An example
Suppose the cost function is exponential. That is, cðVÞ ¼ expðVÞ: Now substituting c0
ðVÞ ¼
expðVÞ in Eq. (7) and then simplifying the resulting expression, we get
g
ffiffiffiffiffiffiffi
Z
ps2
r
exp
2ZLRI  ZI 2  ZL2
R
s2
  þ
2gZIV  g2ZV2  2gZLRV
s2
 
   ¼ expðVÞ: ð9Þ
ARTICLE IN PRESS
A.A. Batabyal et al. / Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 46 (2003) 334–352 347
Taking the natural logarithm of both sides of Eq. (9) and then rewriting the resulting expression
yields a quadratic equation in V: That equation is
g2Z
s2

 V2 þ
2gZLR þ s2  2gZI
s2

 V þ ZI 2 þ ZL2
R  2ZLRI
s2  log g
ffiffiffi
Z
p

   
  
 r
¼ 0: ð10Þ
Denote the coefficient of V2 by a; the coefficient of V by b; and the constant term by d: Then the
solutions to Eq. (10) are
V
i ¼ b7
ffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffi
b2  4ad q
2a ; i ¼ 1; 2; ð11Þ
with b2
X4ad for obvious reasons. Which of these two values of V (only one value if b2 ¼ 4ad)
makes most sense for this maximization problem will depend on the parameters of the stochastic
differential equation (Eq. (1)) describing the evolution of the deviations XðtÞ; and on the
exogenously given phosphorus reducing capacity levels LR and I: For instance, it is tedious but
straightforward to confirm that when g ¼ 5; Z ¼ 1; s2 ¼ 2; LR ¼ 0; and I ¼ 1; b2
44ad holds.
Therefore, Eq. (10) has two real roots V
1 ¼ 0:4219 and V
2 ¼ 0:1019: Substituting these values
of V
1 and V
2 into Eq. (6) and then performing the necessary calculations28 tells us that when
g ¼ 5; Z ¼ 1; s2 ¼ 2; LR ¼ 0; and I ¼ 1; V
1 ¼ 0:4219 maximizes the manager’s objective
function.
We now come to the scarcity value of the ecosystem service under study, i.e., the phosphorus
reducing capacity of our lake. As indicated previously, to get at this scarcity value, we first ask:
What is the stationary probability that this ecosystem service will continue to be provided to
society? This ecosystem service will continue to be provided to society as long as the phosphorus
reducing capacity of our ecosystem is above level I. In this example, we know the (exogenously
given) values of the parameters g; Z; s2; and the levels LR and I: Consequently, we can substitute
these values and the optimal value of the control V
1 ¼ 0:4219 into the first part of the maximand
in Eq. (5). After some algebra, we infer that the steady-state probability of the phosphorus
reducing capacity being above level I is 0.8665.
Now, the stationary probability of not jeopardizing the provision of the ecosystem service in
question is 0.8665. Therefore, the stationary probability of jeopardizing the provision of this
ecosystem service is 1  0:8665 ¼ 0:1335: Note that this last probability corresponds to the
situation in which the lake’s phosphorus reducing capacity is virtually or actually zero and hence
this ecosystem service is truly scarce. We can now proceed in one of two ways. Taking the simpler
route, we can think of 0.1335 as the scarcity value of the phosphorus reducing service. Alternately,
we can think of the scarcity value of the phosphorus reducing service as some function of the
probability 0.1335. The simple route involves identifying the scarcity value of an ecosystem service
as a probability. As such, this allows us to bound the scarcity value of an ecosystem service from
above (the maximum is 1) and from below (the minimum is 0). In the alternate route, we think of
the phosphorus reducing capacity’s scarcity value as a function of the probability 0.1335. In
subsequent research, we plan to analyze the properties of this function. For the moment, we note
that this second route is more general and it includes the first route as a special case. This
ARTICLE IN PRESS
28We used the tables in [8, pp. 494–503] to perform the required computations.
348 A.A. Batabyal et al. / Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 46 (2003) 334–352
completes our preliminary analysis of optimal lake management in the presence of thresholds Ot
and Et: We now conclude and provide a brief discussion of outstanding research questions in this
area.
6. Conclusions
In this exploratory paper, we first made a case for seriously considering the scarcity value of
ecosystem services in contemporary economics research. Next, we pointed out that insight into the
scarcity value of an ecosystem service can be gained by analyzing the manner in which the state of
an ecosystem responds to changes in environmental conditions. This led us to pose and analyze a
stochastic control problem of lake management in which thresholds (Ot and Et in Fig. 2) are
salient. Finally, we used an example to show how this stochastic control theoretic framework can
be used to obtain a numerical value that is closely related to the scarcity value of an ecosystem
service.
Although this is a beginning, much additional research is needed before the approach of this
paper is sufficiently developed to aid the environmental decision-making process. For instance, we
used the stochastic differential equation for the Ornstein–Uhlenbeck process to model the
deviation of our lake’s phosphorus-reducing capacity from the steady-state level. Depending on
the ecosystem under study, it may be necessary to adopt alternate modeling approaches. For
instance, there is no a priori reason to expect the mathematical characterizations of a temperate
estuary and a tropical forest to be identical. Even if general functional forms are similar, key
parameters will typically be different.
The analysis contained in this paper can be extended in a number of directions. In what follows,
we suggest three possible extensions of this paper’s research. First, we analyzed the provision of a
single ecosystem service, namely, the phosphorus reducing service provided by a lake. However,
most ecosystems that humans use and rely on provide multiple ecosystem services. Consequently,
it would be useful to generalize the analysis so that it is possible to analyze the simultaneous
provision of multiple ecosystem services. Second, most economic analyses do not focus on the
connections between external conditions, ecological thresholds, and the ecosystem response
function. Therefore, it would be useful to further study the existence of these thresholds and their
location along, say, the phosphorus deposition dimension. Finally, it would be useful to conduct
research on the need for and the ways of monetizing the scarcity value of an ecosystem service.
Studies of ecosystem management that incorporate these aspects of the problem into the analysis
will provide additional insights into the nexuses between optimal ecosystem management and the
scarcity value of ecosystem services.
Acknowledgments
We thank two anonymous referees and Anastasios Xepapadeas for their valuable comments on
a previous version of this paper. As well, Batabyal thanks the Gosnell endowment at RIT for
financial support. This research was funded in part by the Office of Energy Research of the US
Department of Energy, and the research was managed by Lockheed Martin Energy Research,
ARTICLE IN PRESS
A.A. Batabyal et al. / Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 46 (2003) 334–352 349
Inc., under Contract DE-AC05-84OR21400 for the Department of Energy. The usual disclaimer
applies.
References
[1] E. Arrhenius, T.W. Waltz, The greenhouse effect: implications for economic development, Discussion Paper #78,
World Bank, Washington, DC, 1990.
[2] H.J. Barnett, C. Morse, Scarcity and Growth, Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore, MD, 1963.
[3] A.A. Batabyal, Contemporary research in ecological economics: five outstanding issues, Internat. J. Ecol. Environ.
Sci. 25 (1999) 143–154.
[4] A.A. Batabyal, A renewal theoretic approach to environmental standard setting, Appl. Math. Lett. 13 (2000)
115–119.
[5] A.A. Batabyal, Some theoretical aspects of range condition assessment in the presence of a threshold, Rochester
Institute of Technology, 2002, unpublished manuscript.
[6] A.A. Batabyal, H. Beladi, Time restrictions in natural resource management: a dynamic and stochastic analysis,
Rochester Institute of Technology, 2002, unpublished manuscript.
[7] A.A. Batabyal, S.J. Yoo, Renewal theory and natural resource regulatory policy under uncertainty, Econom. Lett.
46 (1994) 237–241.
[8] W.H. Beyer (Ed.), CRC Standard Mathematical Tables, 29th Edition, CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL, 1991.
[9] S.B. Boaler, C.A.H. Hodge, Vegetation stripes in Somaliland, J. Ecol. 50 (1962) 465–474.
[10] G.H. Brundtland, The UN World Commission on Environment and Development: Our Common Future, Oxford
University Press, Oxford, UK, 1987.
[11] S.R. Carpenter, D. Ludwig, W.A. Brock, Management of eutrophication for lakes subject to potentially
irreversible change, Ecol. Appl. 9 (1999) 751–771.
[12] S. Carpenter, B. Walker, J.M. Anderies, N. Abel, From metaphor to measurement: Resilience of what to what?,
Ecosystems 4 (2001) 765–781.
[13] G.D. Cooke, E.B. Welch, S.A. Peterson, P.R. Newroth, Restoration and Management of Lakes and Reservoirs,
Lewis Publishers, Boca Raton, FL, 1993.
[14] R. Costanza, R. d’Arge, R. de Groot, S. Farber, M. Grasso, B. Hannon, S. Naeem, K. Limburg, J. Paruelo, R.V.
O’Neill, R. Raskin, P. Sutton, M. van den Belt, The value of the world’s ecosystem services and natural capital,
Nature 387 (1997) 253–260.
[15] R. Costanza, C. Folke, Valuing ecosystem services with efficiency, fairness, and sustainability as goals, in: G.C.
Daily (Ed.), Nature’s Services, Island Press, Washington, DC, 1997.
[16] T.J. Crowley, G.R. North, Abrupt climate change and extinction events in earth history, Science 240 (1988)
996–1002.
[17] G.C. Daily, Introduction: what are ecosystem services?, in: G.C. Daily (Ed.), Nature’s Services, Island Press,
Washington, DC, 1997a.
[18] G.C. Daily (Ed.), Nature’s Services, Island Press, Washington, DC, 1997b.
[19] G.C. Daily, Valuing and safeguarding earth’s lifesupport systems, in: G.C. Daily (Ed.), Nature’s Services, Island
Press, Washington, DC, 1997c.
[20] G.C. Daily, K. Ellison, The New Economy of Nature, Island Press, Washington, DC, 2002.
[21] G.C. Daily, T. Soderqvist, S. Aniyar, K. Arrow, P. Dasgupta, P.R. Ehrlich, C. Folke, A. Jansson, B. Jansson, N.
Kautsky, S. Levin, J. Lubchenco, K.G. Maler, D. Simpson, D. Starrett, D. Tilman, B. Walker, The value of nature
and the nature of value, Science 289 (2000) 395–396.
[22] R. Daubenmire, Plant Communities, Harper and Row, New York, 1968.
[23] P.A. Delcourt, H.R. Delcourt, Long-Term Forest Dynamics of the Temperate Zone, Springer, New York, 1987.
[24] F. DiCastri, J. Hansen, M.M. Holland (Eds.), ANew Look at Ecotones, Special Issue 17 Biology International,
IUBS, Paris, France, 1988.
[25] H.T. Dublin, A.R. Sinclair, J. McGlade, Elephants and fire as causes of multiple stable states in the SerengetiMara Woodlands, J. Anim. Ecol. 59 (1990) 1147–1164.
ARTICLE IN PRESS
350 A.A. Batabyal et al. / Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 46 (2003) 334–352
[26] A.M. Freeman, The Measurement of Environmental and Resource Values, Resources for the Future, Washington,
DC, 1993.
[27] R.H. Gardner, R.V. O’Neill, M.G. Turner, Ecological implications of landscape fragmentation, in: M.J.
McDonnell, S.T.A. Pickett (Eds.), Humans as Components of Ecosystems, Springer, New York, 1993.
[28] R. Goodland, The case that the world has reached limits, in: R. Goodland, H. Daly, S. El Serafy (Eds.),
Environmentally Sustainable Economic Development: Building on Brundtland, Environment Department
Working Paper #46, World Bank, Washington, DC, 1991.
[29] L.H. Goulder, D. Kennedy, Valuing ecosystem services: philosophical bases and empirical methods, in: G.C. Daily
(Ed.), Nature’s Services, Island Press, Washington, DC, 1997.
[30] J.M. Hartwick, Intergenerational equity and the investing of rents from exhaustible resources, Amer. Econom.
Rev. 67 (1977) 972–974.
[31] D.R. Headrick, Technological change, in: B.L. Turner, W.C. Clark, R.W. Kates, J.F. Richards, J.T. Mathews,
W.B. Meyer (Eds.), The Earth as Transformed by Human Action, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK,
1990.
[32] G.M. Heal, Nature and the Marketplace, Island Press, Washington, DC, 2001.
[33] E.R. Hobbs, Characterizing the boundary between California annual grassland and coastal sage scrub with
differential profiles, Vegetatio 65 (1986) 115–126.
[34] C.S. Holling, Resilience and stability of ecological systems, Annu. Revi. Ecol. Systematics 4 (1973) 1–23.
[35] C.S. Holling, Engineering resilience versus ecological resilience, in: P.C. Schulze (Ed.), Engineering Within
Ecological Constraints, National Academy Press, Washington, DC, 1996.
[36] C.S. Holling, D.W. Schindler, B. Walker, J. Roughgarden, Biodiversity in the functioning of ecosystems: an
ecological synthesis, in: C. Perrings, K.G. Maler, C. Folke, C.S. Holling, B.O. Jansson (Eds.), Biodiversity Loss,
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, 1995.
[37] H. Hotelling, The economics of exhaustible resources, J. Pol. Econom. 39 (1931) 137–175.
[38] D.D. Jones, The Application of Catastrophe Theory to Ecological Systems, RR-75-15, International Institute for
Applied Systems Analysis, Laxenburg, Austria, 1975.
[39] J.R. Kahn, R.V. O’Neill, Ecological interaction as a source of economic irreversibility, Southern Econom. J. 66
(1999) 391–402.
[40] S. Karlin, H.M. Taylor, ASecond Course in Stochastic Processes, Academic Press, New York, 1981.
[41] R.A. Kerr, Warming’s unpleasant surprise: shivering in the greenhouse?, Science 281 (1998) 156–158.
[42] J.V. Krutilla, Conservation reconsidered, Amer. Econom. Rev. 47 (1967) 777–786.
[43] J.V. Krutilla, A.C. Fisher, The Economics of Natural Environments, Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore,
MD, 1975.
[44] S.A. Levin, Ecosystems and the biosphere as complex adaptive systems, Ecosystems 1 (1998) 431–436.
[45] S.A. Levin, Fragile Dominion, Perseus Books, Reading, MA, 1999.
[46] S.A. Levin, S. Barrett, S. Aniyar, W.J. Baumol, C. Bliss, B. Bolin, P. Dasgupta, P.R. Ehrlich, C. Folke, I. Gren,
C.S. Holling, A. Jansson, B. Jansson, K.G. Maler, D. Martin, C. Perrings, E. Sheshinski, Resilience in natural and
socioeconomic systems, Environ. Develop. Econom. 3 (1998) 222–235.
[47] J. Lewandrowski, R.F. Darwin, M. Tsigas, A. Raneses, Estimating costs of protecting global ecosystem diversity,
Ecol. Econom. 29 (1999) 111–125.
[48] K.G. Maler, Development, ecological resources and their management: a study of complex dynamic systems, Eur.
Econom. Rev. 44 (2000) 645–665.
[49] H.A. Mooney, P.R. Ehrlich, Ecosystem services: a fragmentary history, in: G.C. Daily (Ed.), Nature’s Services,
Island Press, Washington, DC, 1997.
[50] B.G. Norton, Toward Unity Among Environmentalists, Oxford University Press, New York, 1991.
[51] S.M. Ogle, W.A. Reiners, A phytosociological study of exotic annual brome grasses in a mixed grass prairie/
ponderosa pine forest ecotone, Amer. Midland Naturalist 147 (2002) 25–31.
[52] R.V. O’Neill, R.H. Gardner, D.E. Weller, Chaotic models as representations of ecological systems, Amer.
Naturalist 120 (1982) 259–263.
[53] R.V. O’Neill, A.R. Johnson, A.W. King, A hierarchical framework for the analysis of scale, Landscape Ecol. 3
(1989) 193–205.
ARTICLE IN PRESS
A.A. Batabyal et al. / Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 46 (2003) 334–352 351
[54] C. Perrings, Ecological resilience in the sustainability of economic development, in: S. Faucheux, D. Pearce,
J. Proops (Eds.), Models of Sustainable Development, Edward Elgar, Cheltenham, UK, 1996.
[55] C. Perrings, Resilience in the dynamics of economy–environment systems, Environ. Resource Econom. 11 (1998)
513–520.
[56] J.D. Phillips, Biogeomorphology and landscape evolution: the problem of scale, Geomorphology 13 (1995)
337–347.
[57] D. Pimentel, J. Allen, A. Beers, World agriculture and soil erosion, Bioscience 37 (1987) 277–283.
[58] S.L. Pimm, The complexity and stability of ecosystems, Nature 307 (1984) 321–326.
[59] R.E. Plant, M. Kim, On the mechanism underlying bursting in the Aplysia Abdominal Ganglion R12 Cell, Math.
Biosci. 26 (1975) 357–375.
[60] D.W. Pogue, G.D. Schnell, Effects of agriculture on habitat complexity in a prairie-forest ecotone in the southern
great plains of North America, Agric. Ecosystems Environ. 87 (2001) 287–298.
[61] J.B. Rosser, C. Folke, F. Gunther, H. Isomaki, C. Perrings, T. Puu, Discontinuous change in multilevel
hierarchical systems, Syst. Res. 11 (1994) 77–94.
[62] E.B. Royce, M.G. Barbour, Mediterranean climate effects I. Conifer water use across a Sierra Nevada ecotone,
Amer. J. Botany 88 (2001) 911–918.
[63] A.F. Rozich, A.F. Gaudy, Response of phenol-acclimated activated sludge to quantitative shock loading, J. Water
Pollut. Control Fed. 57 (1985) 795–804.
[64] M. Scheffer, S. Carpenter, J.A. Foley, C. Folke, B. Walker, Catastrophic shifts in ecosystems, Nature 413 (2001)
591–596.
[65] D.G. Sprugel, Dynamic structure of wave-generated abies balsamea forests in the northeastern United States,
J. Ecol. 64 (1976) 889–891.
[66] H.M. Taylor, S. Karlin, An Introduction to Stochastic Modeling, 3rd Edition, Academic Press, San Diego, CA,
1998.
[67] B.L. Turner, W.C. Clark, R.W. Kates, J.F. Richards, J.T. Mathews, W.B. Meyer (Eds.), The Earth as
Transformed by Human Action, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, 1990.
[68] H.R. Varian, Microeconomic Analysis, 3rd Edition, W.W. Norton and Company, New York, 1992.
[69] P.M. Vitousek, P.R. Ehrlich, A.H. Ehrlich, Human appropriation of the products of photosynthesis, Bioscience 36
(1986) 368–373.
[70] R.T. Watson (Ed.), Climate Change 2001, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, 2002.
[71] R.M. Worden, T.L. Donaldson, Dynamics of a biological fixed film for phenol degradation in a fluidized bed
bioreactor, Biotechnol. Bioeng. 30 (1987) 398–412.
ARTICLE IN PRESS
352 A.A. Batabyal et al. / Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 46 (2003) 334–352
巫继学：当代中国土地资源问题的严重性
伴随着中国经济体制改革与社会主义市场经济的建设，中国历年来都有大量农用土地转变为商
业用地。应该说，这是市场经济建设中传统农业社会转变为现代工业社会、农村人口减少城市扩容所
必然要经历的过程。然而，有一天，人们突然发现，农地失得太快了，太过份了。据《中国农业统计
资料》计算，2001 年每天大约消失 76 个村落，2002 年大约为每天消失 40 个村落，2003 年大约为
每天消失 43 个村落。平均测算，近三年来，每天平均大约有 57 个村落从中国大地上结束了它的历
史生命。与此相关的数据是，由于农田被大量侵占与不合理使用，从 1996 年至 2004 年全国每年减
少大量耕地一说 500 万亩，一说 1000 多万亩，一说 3630 万亩。无论以那个数据衡量，形势都是异
常严峻的，任由土地如此锐减，那末中国的耕地全部消失的日子不会遥远。由此也就不难理解，为什
么现阶段我国有年均 100 多万农民失去耕地，有那么多农民生活陷入困顿。
依我的观察，近年来，资本那双狡狤的眼睛始终都没有离开农地，特别是私人资本与权力资本
相勾结为特殊利益集团时，疯狂侵占农地的事就没有断过，几乎超出了人们的想象力。什么事绕到最
后，都少不了侵占农地。房地产开发，当然要大量圈地；企业兼并，醉翁之意也在替换圈地；教育体
制改革，几乎变成了占着原来的再大量吃进新农地建“大学园”的代名词；都市商贸城建设，原本就是
打农地的主意；新农村建设，更是新圈地运动的新变种，而今，中部崛起，也摇身成了狂吃农地的饕
餮！刚刚处理过的郑州非法占地案其实并非个案，经查，广东省清远市石角镇政府在未办理建设用地
报批手续情况下，非法征收农民集体土地；山西省太原市经济技术开发区管委会在富士康（太原）科
技工业园三期项目供地手续尚未依法办理的情况下，非法批准该项目开工建设；太原市晋源区政府未
采取有效措施制止山西太原万水物资贸易城和富丽装饰材料有限公司违法占用土地行为；河南省安阳
市政府在安阳市莲花公司“四季花香生态园”项目违反土地利用总体规划确定的用途，非法批准先行实
施建设。经监察部部长办公会议研究决定，对上述四起土地违法案件涉及太原市经济技术开发区管委
会主任张金旺、清远市清城区副区长麦永联等8名有关责任人员给予纪律处分。其他涉嫌犯罪的3人，
移送司法机关处理。
伴随农地大量转变为商业用地，目前中国的土地现状是：建设用地总量增长过快，工业用地低
成本过度扩张，违法违规用地、滥占耕地现象屡禁不止。
回顾一下这段历史十分必要。中国大量圈地、大量吞食农田有三次高峰，都伴随着房地产业的
大拓展：第一次发生在 1980 年代末至 1990 年代初，最后以泡沫房地产破灭而收场，至今在海南、
珠海、广州、北海、上海、北京等地都留有那时的“烂尾楼”。第二次发生在 1990 年代后期至 2000 年
代初，与此相伴生的是房地产的再度崛起，且一发难以收拾，从而导致中央政府不断推出收缩地根新
政。第三次则始于近二年，由于中央政府的强制手段，特别是土地的“挂牌交易”刺激开发商采取迂回
战略，钻营政策空子进行疯狂圈地，这不可避免地引发现今更为严厉、更为有效的土地政策。在土地
问题上，中央政府与地方政府的周旋与博弈从来都没有停止过，这期间宏观调控政策日臻完善。
许多开发商都说，大量圈地是城市建设与商业开发的需要，甚至不断地有“地荒论”出来煽风点火。
国土资源部近年时不时都会有高层管理人员出面廓清事实，国家统计局也有相应公布数字予以印证。
1
一、资源储备的概念
 1、概念定义 
 储备是指将必要的物资储存起来以准备必要时应
用的一种行为。
 资源储备是个人、企业或政府为应付自然资源可
能的供给时滞、短缺和升值，实现资源采购和运输的
规模经济，以保证未来生活、生产和社会正常运转，
而采取的将资源及资源产品以妥善方式暂时闲置不用
的行为。
第二节：资源储备
2
 从资源安全角度出
发，资源储备主要是指
自然资源的储备，包括
耗竭性资源的储备、再
生资源的储备以及可以
以物理形式储存的资源，
如与食物安全密切相关
的土地储备。
第二节：资源储备
3
 2、国家战略资源安全的主要内容
 重要的战略性资源是指关系到国计民生、在资源
系统中居支配地位，具有常态下市场垄断性和非常态
下供给瞬时中断性特点的资源。
 例如：石油、矿产、与土地密切相关的食物等，
是国家资源安全的基础和核心，构成了国家战略资源
安全的重要内容。
第二节：资源储备
4
 （1）矿产资源储备
 矿产资源储量在一定程度上决定了一个国家应对
国际经济、政治与军事危机的能力，是国家综合国力
的重要内容。
 一些发达国家和中等发达国家，如美国、日本、
法国、德国、瑞典、挪威、英国、韩国等，都不同程
度地建立了矿产资源战略储备制度。
第二节：资源储备
5
 矿产资源储备的主要目的是国家的国防安全和经
济安全。
 例如，美国将“国防所必须的、战争期间将全部
或部分依赖外国供给并需要严格定量控制储存和分配
的矿产”定义为“战略矿产”
，将“国防所必须的，
战争期间其获得虽然困难，但可以在国内生产或买到
较充足数量的，在一定程度上需要储存和分配控制的
矿产”定义为“紧缺矿产”
。
第二节：资源储备
6
 （2）能源资源储备
 能源的安全问题是现代化国家尤其是中国这种能
源生产与消费大国可持续发展所面临的重要课题。
 能源资源安全取决于一个国家或地区经济发展和
社会进步对能源消耗的需求及可供能源的保障程度。
 能源安全状况一般用储备天数来衡量，包括储备
资源相当于多少天的净进口量、相当于多少天的进口
量、相当于多少天的消费量等三种不同概念。
第二节：资源储备
7
 目前世界许多国家把90天的能
源消费量作为（石油）资源储备的
一般标准，并在逐渐增加。
 另一个能源安全标准是石油供
应中断占需求量的比例，一般认为
如果超过7%，将会严重影响石油资
源安全，需要采取必要的措施，如
动用储备资源等进行干预。
第二节：资源储备
8
 （3）耕地与食物安全
 粮食安全是20世纪70年代中期随着世界性粮食危
机的产生而提出来的。
第二节：资源储备
9
 作为一种特殊的战略资
源，粮食不仅是一种经济资
源，也是一种生命资源。
 中国是人口大国和农业
大国，以食物生产的资源基
础安全、生产过程安全和消
费格局安全为核心的食物安
全总是难以回避，土地、粮
食与人口间的矛盾将是我们
长期面临的问题。
第二节：资源储备
10
 联合国粮农组织1974年定义粮食安全为保证任何
人在任何时候都能得到为了生存和健康所需要的足够
食物，并为此提出了一个确保食物安全的最低储备水
平，即谷物的储量占需求量的17-18%，其中周转储备
占12%，后备储备占5-6%。
 就中国国情和目前的发展水平而言，粮食进口依
存度低于5%，则表明实现了粮食自给；进口依存度低
于10%，则表明粮食供求处于安全状态。
第二节：资源储备
11
二
、资源储备方式
 对于影响国家经济和社
会发展的重要资源的储备方 式，主要有以下几种：
 
1
、战略储备
 为了维护世界和平
，
维
护本国的安全和利益,各国都
建有一定数量的军队
，并储
备一定的军用物资和战备物 资，以备紧急时使用。
第二节：资源储备
12
 2、安全保障储备
 安全保障储备是为保障平时经济发展、防止资源
供应中断、确保经济稳定、消除大幅度波动而进行的
储备。
 例如，由于各种灾害、事故以及国际上因封锁、
禁运和有条件的输出等情况的出现都可能引起资源物
质的短缺和不足，造成供给中断，进而影响经济的顺
利发展。因此，有必要保持一定的储备。
第二节：资源储备
13
 3、市场储备
 由于季节不同、供求变化以及由各种原因造成的
交通中断、生产停滞等引起供应紧张，国家为保证供
给、满足市场需要而进行的储备，也叫商业储备。
 市场储备可以分为国内市场储备和国际市场储备
两种。前者是为保证国内市场需求进行的物质储备，
如我国的专项粮食储备主要就是对内为目的；后者则
是为对外贸易、履行合同等而进行的资源物质储备。
第二节：资源储备
14
第二节：资源储备
15
国家或地区 美国 德国 日本 韩国
储备目的 战略储备，供国家非常时
期使用 经济安全保障储备 保障经济安全储
备
稳定供求和价
格
制度建立 1939年 未设立 1983年 1967年
储备品种 25类80种（仅指战略和关
键物资储备）
铬、锰、钒、钴、蓝
石棉
镍、铬、钨、钼、
钴、锰、钒
有色金属、铁
合金、原材料、
设备材料27种
储备目标 国家紧急时期可供3年国
内需要的量 供本国消费一年的量 国内消费60日的
量
不定
储备实况
1985年186亿美元，1997
年54亿美元，1998年拥有
41亿美元的战略储备
不明 1997年末已储备
46.9日量
1996年3月约
2500亿韩元
储备机构 国家国防部（1988年始） 储备协会（计划有政
府和民间共同创建）
国家和民间金属
矿业事业团，民
间企业
国家经济规划
院供应厅
备注
1992年10月冷战结束后，
确定新储备目标，依据
《战略重要物资储备法》
由于政权更换，上述
储备计划自1980年以
来实际处于搁置状态
1998年4-6月钒
涨价时售出
1985年开始稀
有金属储备
部分国家的矿产品战略储备制度一览表
16
三、资源储备战略
 1、资源储备战略的作用
 资源储备可以作为国家宏观调控的重要手段和物
质力量，是稳定供求关系和应付突发事件的有效手段，
是保障国家资源安全的核心。
 资源储备不仅可以保障我国的经济安全，还有利
于我国在国际政治较量中站稳脚跟，争取主动，避免
受制于人。
第二节：资源储备
17
 2、我国的资源储备战略
 目前，我国已经成为石油需求大国，是近年来世
界石油消费量的最高点。随着石油消费总量的快速增
长，经济增长对石油消费的依赖程度也越来越高。
 针对以上情况，建立战略石油储备是保护我国可
能发生的短期石油供应波动的有效途径。
 2004年9月，我国战略石油储备基地建设的一期工
程在大连、黄岛、镇海、舟山全面铺开，国家有关部
门已拟定了石油战略的相关法规以及一些管理办法。
第二节：资源储备












www.sciencemag.org SCIENCE VOL 344 16 MAY 2014 691
LETTERS
edited by Jennifer Sills
699
COMMENTARY
LETTERS I BOOKS I POLICY FORUM I EDUCATION FORUM I PERSPECTIVES
694
Aged organisms Seeking new crops
CREDIT: ALBERTHERRING/WIKIMEDIA COMMONS
China’s Soil Pollution: Farms on the Frontline
CHINA’S SOIL POLLUTION IS MUCH WORSE THAN PREVIOUSLY THOUGHT (“CHINA GETS SERIous about its pollutant-laden soil,” C. Larson, News & Analysis, 28 March, p. 1415). A report 
released on 17 April admitted that 16.1% of the Chinese soil was polluted, including 19.4% 
of farmland, 10.0% of forest land, 10.4% of grassland, and 11.4% of unused land (1). Of 
the contaminated soil samples, 82% contained toxic inorganic pollutants, the most common 
being heavy metals such as cadmium, mercury, arsenic, chromium, and lead, which can cause 
chronic health problems. Moreover, levels of organic pollutants such as dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane (DDT), polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs), and hexachlorocyclohexanes 
(HCHs) are also very high, and samples above established safety levels account for 1.9%, 
1.4%, and 0.5%, respectively, of all tested soil samples, which covered 6.3 million square 
kilometers. Aside from industrial plant waste and mining operations, the report states that the 
unsustainable use of chemical fertilizers and pesticides is a main human cause of widespread 
soil pollution (1). 
China’s food production is affected by soil pollution but also creates much pollution itself. 
China consumes nearly one-third of the world’s fertilizer, and the pesticide usage per unit area 
is 2.5 times the world average (2). The quality of cultivated land should be guaranteed. Farmers 
should be subsidized to improve fertilizer use effi ciency and encouraged to adopt organic and 
biodynamic farming methods that are not reliant on heavy input of chemicals. Soil remediation projects should be implemented to improve the polluted soil gradually. Finally, there is a 
need to change cultural habits relating to consumption so as to reduce food waste nationwide.
RUISHAN CHEN,1
* ALEX DE SHERBININ,2 CHAO YE,3
 GUOQING SHI1
1School of Public Administration, Hohai University, Nanjing, 210098, China. 2Center for International Earth Science 
Information Network (CIESIN), Columbia University, Palisades, NY 10964, USA. 3College of Geographic Sciences, Nanjing 
Normal University, Nanjing 210023, China.
*Corresponding author. E-mail: chenrsh04@gmail.com 
References
 1. Ministry of Environmental Protection and Ministry of Land and Resources of P.R. China, “Reports on China’s Soil Pollution 
Survey” (2014); www.zhb.gov.cn/gkml/hbb/qt/201404/t20140417_270670.htm [in Chinese].
 2. “Establish a long-term mechanism for sustainable agricultural development,” China People’s Daily (22 January 2014); http://
paper.people.com.cn/rmrb/html/2014-01/22/nw.D110000renmrb_20140122_1-02.htm#fi n [in Chinese].
China’s Soil Pollution: 
Urban Brownfi elds
CHINA’S PLANS TO TACKLE FARMLAND POLlution and improve food safety are to be 
welcomed (“China gets serious about its 
pollutant-laden soil,” C. Larson, News & 
Analysis, 28 March, p. 1415). However, the 
country faces equally serious urban soil and 
water pollution. 
As a result of unparalleled urbanization 
over recent decades, many polluting and 
energy-intensive activities, including steel, 
coke, pesticide, and chemical industries, 
have relocated from urban areas to peripheral 
or rural areas (1). The legacy is more than 
5000 brownfi elds—sites polluted, or potentially polluted, by hazardous substances—in 
China’s major cities (2). A recently released 
ambitious urbanization plan will move more 
polluting plants from cities, leaving more 
brownfi eld sites (3). Brownfi elds pose health 
and environmental hazards in densely populated cities and are obstacles to urban and 
economic development. Soil concentrations 
of pollutants, including heavy metals, persistent organic pollutants, and benzene, can 
be hundreds of times the regulated limits (4). 
Seepage will also result in groundwater contamination. 
Many brownfields have been used for 
housing. Without adequate survey and remediation of toxic brownfields, construction 
has already resulted in acute poisoning incidents. For example, workers were hospitalized during construction on sites at former 
pesticide factories in Beijing and Wuhan (4). 
Residents of newly built houses are often 
unaware of pollution beneath their properties. The Guangzhou Asia Games Village site 
was changed due to soil pollution from fertilizer factories, but housing for local people is 
being built in the area (5).
The Chinese Premier vowed to declare 
“war on pollution.” However, government 
spending on environmental protection and 
energy conservation decreased by 9.7% 
between 2012 and 2013 (6). Funding and 
Contamination below. A recent report found soil pollution in 19.4% of China’s farmlands. 
Published byAAAS
 on March 29, 2015 www.sciencemag.org Downloaded from 
LETTERS
Join the
Conversation!
Twitter is a great way
to connect with AAAS
members and staff about
the issues that matter to
you most. Be a part of
the discussion while
staying up-to-date on
the latest news and
information about your
personal member
benefits.
Follow us
@AAASmember and
join the conversation
with #AAAS
MemberCentral.aaas.org
technology may limit remediation of Chinese 
brownfi elds, but information should be made 
publicly available to raise awareness and facilitate wider participation in brownfi eld management. Experience from elsewhere, such 
as the U.S. “Brownfi eld Act” (7), should be 
deployed to demonstrate commitment to tackling the growing problem of soil pollution. 
HONG YANG,1
* XIANJIN HUANG,2
JULIAN R. THOMPSON,3
 ROGER J. FLOWER3
1Centre for Ecological and Evolutionary Synthesis, Department of Biosciences, University of Oslo, Blindern, 0316, 
Oslo, Norway. 2School of Geographic and Oceanographic 
Science, Xianlin Campus, Nanjing University, Nanjing 
210023, China. 3Wetland Research Unit/Environmental 
Change Research Centre, UCL Department of Geography, 
University College London, London, WC1E 6BT, UK.
*Corresponding author. E-mail: hongyanghy@gmail.com
References
 1. H. Yang, R. J. Flower, J. R. Thompson, Nature 490, 342 
(2012).
 2. East Asia Infrastructure Division of the World Bank, China 
Waste Management: Problems and Suggestions (World 
Bank, 2005).
 3. The Central People’s Government of the People’s 
Republic of China, 2014 (www.gov.cn/zhengce/
2014-03/16/content_2640075.htm) [in Chinese].
 4. M. Jin, Ecol. Econ. 258, 18 (2012).
 5. S. Gao, K. Wang, Caijing Mag. 323, 1 (2012).
 6. Ministry of Finance of the People’s Republic of China, 
2014 (www.mof.gov.cn/zhengwuxinxi/caizhengxinwen/
201403/t20140306_1052323.html) [in Chinese].
 7. Y. Gong, International Experience in Policy and 
Regulatory Frameworks for Brownfi eld Site Management
(World Bank, 2010).
Scientifi c Justifi cation 
for Animal Capture
IN THE NEWS & ANALYSIS STORY “COURT 
slams Japan’s scientifi c whaling” (4 April, p. 
22), V. Morell recounts the recent judgment 
of the International Court of Justice that the 
second Japanese scientifi c whaling program 
in the Antarctic (JARPA II) shall cease. This 
decision has given extra weight to a principle that is already contained in most existing 
scientifi c and ethical guidelines for research 
involving the taking of wild animals: Sample 
sizes (numbers of animals taken) must be justifi ed in advance in relation to the specifi c 
objectives of the research. 
Wisely, the court did not try to answer 
the broader question of what constitutes 
legitimate scientifi c research, but it faulted 
the absence of explanation or analysis as to 
how the specifi ed numbers of whales to be 
caught would have contributed to the objectives of the JARPA II program. The ruling 
has implications for Japan’s whaling program 
in the North Pacifi c (JARPN II). An Expert 
Panel appointed by the International Whaling 
Commission to review Japan’s whaling in 
the North Pacifi c, which targeted up to 100 
sei whales, 50 Bryde’s whales, 220 minke 
whales, and 10 sperm whales a year (1), also 
noted the absence of a scientifi c justifi cation 
for the number of whales killed in relation to 
quantifi able research objectives (2). 
While not restricting the freedom of scientifi c research, the International Court of 
Justice ruling highlights the importance of 
careful analysis and clear justification of 
the study duration and of the sample sizes 
required to meet research objectives, in 
advance of any take of wild animals. 
JUSTIN COOKE,1
 VASSILI PAPASTAVROU,2
RUSSELL LEAPER,3
* SIDNEY HOLT4
1Centre for Ecosystem Management Studies, Windenreute, 
79312, Germany. 2Department of Biology, University of 
Bristol, Bristol, BS8 2LR, UK. 3School of Biological Sciences, 
University of Aberdeen, Aberdeen, AB24 2TZ, UK. 4Voc 
Palazzetta 68, Paciano PG, 06060, Italy.
*Corresponding author. E-mail: r.c.leaper@abdn.ac.uk
Published byAAAS
资源经济学课程导学
黄贤金
1
主要内容 
一、资源经济学与国家战略 
二、资源经济学与专业教育 
三、资源经济学与相关学科的关系 
四、资源经济学的目的及内容 
五、主要参考书目 
2
第一节 资源经济学与国家战略 
3
年份 1980 1990 2000 2005 2008 2009 2010
中国能
耗总量/
世界能
源总量
-- -- --
15.67
%
17.59
%
19.11
%
19.61
%
中国
GDP/世
界GDP
1.70
%
1.60
%
3.70
%
4.95
%
7.40
%
8.60
%
9.30
%
世界能
效/中国
能效
3.02 3.00 2.96 2.91 2.74 2.67 2.59
第一节 资源经济学与国家战略 
和平发展
生态文明
和谐发展
国家安全
4
第一节 资源经济学与国家战略 
和平发展
 
 国际地缘政治问题
 中非资源战略问题
 国家资源安全与国际资源合作
5
第一节 资源经济学与国家战略 
生态文明
 政绩考核。例如:水耗、能耗、环境等
要素纳入GDP考核指标；
 绿色产业。例如：节能环保产业、新
能源产业、高新技术产业等；
 生态制度。例如：排污权交易、资源
价格杠杆、资源产权等
 消费方式。 
6
第一节 资源经济学与国家战略 
和谐发展
 人与自然的和谐。从跨越发展、加快
发展、率先发展到又好又快发展
 人与人的和谐。资源掠夺性发展（如
土地征用等）与社会和谐问题
 重点区域的人地和谐。资源缺乏地区
的社会和谐问题（如煤/水矛盾等）
7
第一节 资源经济学与国家战略 
国家安全
 能源安全（如石油进口依存度高）
 生态安全
 资源安全（水、耕地、矿产资源安全
等，如18亿亩耕地面积保护等）
 粮食安全
8
第一节 资源经济学与国家战略 
 分析国家战略实施与资源经济问题的相互关
系，揭示国家战略转变、经济转型中的资源经济
关系演变规律，并调整、优化国家战略： 
 和平发展框架下研究制订国家资源安全战略 
 分析中央政府与地方政府的资源经济策略，
寻求合作博弈的政府资源利用行为与政策指引 
 更加重视空间资源的战略开发与合理利用，
更加重视新能源的开发利用的资源经济政策
9
1
一、资源稀缺的表征
1、经济学上对资源稀缺的认识
 资源的稀缺性既不是指这种资源不可增加或者可
以耗尽，与与这种资源的绝对量大小无关，而是
指在给定的时期内，与需要相比较，其供给量是
相对不足的。
 即资源稀缺性是资源的供给相对于人类的需要而
言的。
第三节：资源稀缺
2
2、国内学者对资源稀缺的定义：
 是指由资源的自然有限性所引起的在经济上表现
为只有通过竞争才能取得和使用资源的一种状态，其
主要标志是资源市场价格的存在。
3、资源的稀缺是有时间属性的，是一个动态的概念。
很久以前，对于人类生存和发展而言，认为许多资源
都不是稀缺的；而随着人口的增加和资源开发速度的
加快，人们改变了对资源的认识。
第三节：资源稀缺
3
二、资源稀缺的物理度量
1、物理度量：通常是通过储量分析来进行，一般是
首先估计某种资源的现存储量，并根据现在和未来的
用量水平来推算这种资源可供使用的年限，借此衡量
资源的稀缺程度。
2、度量方法：对于非再生资源一般用资源储量与其
年开采量或年利用量的比率（储量用量比）来表示；
对于可再生资源，尤其是生物资源，则还需要考虑资
源自身的再生条件和再生特性。
第三节：资源稀缺
4
3、度量模型
 Y为耗竭资源耗尽年数，
S为资源储量，r为资源开
采速度或者利用速度；
 Y’为可循环利用资源耗
尽年数，R为资源循环利
用速度。
S Y
r
S R Y
r



耗竭资源
可循环利用资源
第三节：资源稀缺
5
三、资源稀缺的经济度量
1、经济度量：主要是从获得资源的代价大小的角
度，借助一套经济指标来反映资源的稀缺程度。
2、目前对资源稀缺经济度量的指标有：
 （1）资源价格
（2）资源稀缺性租金
（3）边际发现成本
（4）边际开采成本
第三节：资源稀缺
6
 （1）资源价格
 许多耗竭资源的价格变动一般遵循“U”形的变化轨
迹，即起初由于技术相对落后，开发规模小而开
发成本高，后来，由于技术进步，开发成本下降，
价格下降，再到后来，成本难以下降甚至上升导
致价格上升；
 另外，资源开发利用还存在外部性问题，这往往
使资源市场价格难以真实反映资源的真实稀缺程
度。
第三节：资源稀缺
7
 （2）资源稀缺性租金
 资源稀缺性租金又被称为资源使用者成本，是指
资源产品现价与资源边际开采成本之间的差值；
 资源稀缺性租金能否真实反映资源的稀缺程度，
与资源产品的现价以及边际开采成本相关；
 当然，稀缺性租金只是一种不够准确的测度，例
如公共产权资源的稀缺性租金在任何时候都为零。
第三节：资源稀缺
8
 （3）边际发现成本
 边际发现成本是发现新资源地的增加成本。通常认
为，资源的边际发现成本是可以观测到的，即通过
对资源的勘探费用的观测得到。
 （4）边际开采成本
 一般认为，人类对资源的开发利用顺序是先易后难，
随着开发量增加，低等级资源逐步被开发，资源的
边际开发成本逐步上升，因此，边际开采成本能够
较好地反映资源的稀缺程度。
第三节：资源稀缺
9
四、资源稀缺对经济发展的影响
1、资源稀缺对经济增长的影响
 资源总量约束及其程度决定着长期经济发展的规
模和增长速度；
 由于某些个别资源稀缺程度提高，所造成的资源
约束会使经济发展得到抑制，因为这些个别的资源常
常成为经济发展的“瓶颈”
；
 例如，非洲匮乏的水资源一直是这一地区农业生
产和经济发展缓慢的重要阻碍。
第三节：资源稀缺
10
2、资源稀缺对经济结构的影响
 由于不同产业对资源的需求是不一样的，因此，
一个国家或地区的经济结构便受到资源稀缺的限制。
 因此，可以说，资源稀缺制约着一个国家或地区
经济发展模式的选择，一定的资源稀缺状况决定着
一定的经济发展模式。
第三节：资源稀缺
11
五、缓解资源稀缺的途径
1、充分发挥技术进步的作用
 （1）技术进步可以发现新的资源储量
（2）技术进步可以带动资源利用率的提高
（3）技术进步促进生产过程中对稀缺资源的替代
（4）技术进步可以推动资源利用和生产规模的扩
大，实现资源利用的规模经济
第三节：资源稀缺
12
2、加大经济的开放度
 加大一个国家或地区的经济开放度，尤其利用双
边或多边贸易可以使各国或地区都能发挥自己的资源
优势，克服稀缺资源对经济发展的约束；
 例如，日本是一个资源十分贫乏的国家，但“二战”
以后，其通过实施“吸收性战略”大大加速了经济的开
发度，引进了大量资源，迅速提升了经济实力。
第三节：资源稀缺
13
3、改善交通运输条件
 一方面，交通的建设和运输条件的改善使大量沉
重的资源运输成为可能，边远地区无法利用资源的开
发成为可能；
 另一方面，运输条件的改善也降低了勘探活动的
成本，由于人们接近资源的程度得到提高，使许多难
度大、成本高的勘探活动成为可能，这无疑会促进更
多资源储量的发现。
第三节：资源稀缺
14
4、有效的制度安排和价格政策
 一方面，资源的产权制度、企业的组织制度和资
源的价格政策对资源的利用效率作用很大，建立有效
的资源产权关系和现代企业组织制度可以有效约束人
们对资源的开发速度或利用强度，从而缓解资源的耗
竭和由此造成的进一步稀缺；
 另一方面，有效的价格政策可以很好地发挥在资
源配置方面的作用，促使资源的节约，以便更有效地
对其加以利用。
第三节：资源稀缺
1
 人地关系的演进 
 
 膜拜自然 
 掠夺自然 
 协调自然 （生态文明） 
第三节 环境伦理、环境容量与资源利用
2
 人地关系：从人为割裂到理性融合
人类：经济系统
厂商
消费者
自然界
废弃物
资源、环境、生态要素
第三节 环境伦理、环境容量与资源利用
3
人
地
系
统
物
质
交
换
关
系
状
态
协调
恶化
社会经济发展水平 低 高
原 始 需 求 阶
段-生存发展
观-初期发展
阶段-原始循
环型 
物质享受与文
化需求-片面增
长发展观-工业
化阶段-单向掠
夺型 
全面需求阶段可持续展观-后
工业化阶段-高
级循环型 
 人地协调产生的历史必然性示意图 
国家环境保护总局：任勇
第三节 环境伦理、环境容量与资源利用
4
 生态文明的形成：从自然权利到生态文明,生态文明是人地协
调的高级阶段
仁慈主义 动物与人同权
生物中心主义 生物同权
生态平等主义 自然生态系统同权
道
德
关
怀
自然权利源于人类对经济社会发展方
式的反思，即提出还权利于自然。 
1215年英国《大宪章》“天赋权利” 
中国古代：人地协调 
现代： 
 “全面、协调、可持续”的科
学发展观；“构建和谐社会”、
“建设资源节约型社会和环境友好
型社会”的战略主张；生态文明，
又好又快发展战略；《循环经济促
进法》颁布并将实施。 
 
国 际 国 内 
第三节：环境伦理、环境容量与资源利用
5
 生态文明的主要争议： 
 一是自然本位还是人本位；
 二是生态文明与人类文明的关系——“脱胎”还是
“延续”
；
 三是生态文明与物质文明、精神文明、政治文明的
关系—“独立”亦或“附属”
。 
 生态文明是现代人类的意识主流 
 生态文明是社会发展的行为主导
第三节 环境伦理、环境容量与资源利用
6
 环境伦理：满足人类需求和保护环境功能作为人类对 
待环境系统的伦理规范。其内涵包括： 
 人类与环境系统要素共同享用地球上的资源；
 人类是自然环境的一部分；
 地球的环境要素供给是有限的；
 人类必须保护环境资源；
 地球环境是有容量限制的；
 环境系统作为生命支持系统具有环境容量限制；
 人类受到环境规律/法则的制约；
 人类只有维持环境过程的完整并与环境系统合作才能取得最大
的成功。 
第三节 环境伦理、环境容量与资源利用
7
 环境容量：指在人类生存和自然生态不
致受害的前提下，某一环境所能容纳的
污染物的最大负荷量，或者说环境容纳
污染物质的能力的限度。 
 区域：国家环境容量、地区环境容量、
城市环境容量、农村环境容量等； 
 要素：土壤环境容量、水环境容量、大
气环境容量和生物环境容量等
第三节 环境伦理、环境容量与资源利用
8
环境容量特征 
 
 稀缺性
 相对稳定性
 区域差异性
 公共性
第三节 环境伦理、环境容量与资源利用
经济合理的排污量 9
第三节 环境伦理、环境容量与资源利用
10
污染控制手段分类表
类型 主要手段 
有利于外部性内部
化的制度手段 
谈判与允许交易 
法律调整 
教育/意识或社会责任培训 
创建产权 
命令控制型手段 
规定投入/技术：最低技术要求，最佳可得技术 
规定产出：对正常产出规定配额；对污染物规定排量、发放许可证 
规定选址：对排放源规定区域、控制重点、合理布局；对个人从有害地区
搬迁 
规定时间：规定噪声管制时间 
行为限制 
经济激励（基于市
场）手段 
污染税：对投入品和排放物征收污染税 
污染消减补贴 
可交易排放许可 
资料来源：[英]罗杰·珀曼等. 自然资源与环境经济学（第二版），中国经济出版社，2002.
第三节 环境伦理、环境容量与资源利用
1
本章要求：
 在理解再生资源的概念与基本特征的
基础上，掌握再生资源开发利用的基本原
则以及具体的决策依据与体系。最后，结
合对再生资源开发利用模式的学习，学会
分析目前我国的再生资源利用状况、存在
的问题以及今后开发利用模式的选择等。
第七章：再生资源
2
一、再生资源的概念
 1、定义：再生资源，或称可更新资源，是指具
有自我循环、更新、补充并可持续利用的一类资源，
如土壤资源、水资源、气象资源、各种生物资源等。
 这类资源直接参与生态系统的演化，是地球生态
系统的重要组成部分。
 因此，再生资源的再生性具有一定的生态系统的
机制，其自身的数量、质量和规模能够恢复和再生。
第一节：再生资源的概念与基本特征
3
 2、例外的情况
 如果再生资源的再生性机制受到破坏，如不合理
利用、过度利用，超过一定的阈值，破坏了其恢复的
环境，它们也会被耗竭用尽。
 例如，土壤是以成土母质为基础，含有各种营养
元素及微生物组成的具有自我调节和修复的系统，如
果长期不合理利用，其土壤质量将受影响，其生产能
力将下降。
第一节：再生资源的概念与基本特征
4
二、再生资源的基本特征
 再生资源类型复杂多样，各
种不同的再生资源无论从物理形
态到化学组成，存在较大的差异，
如水资源与土地资源，性质也存
在较大的差异。
 但从再生性角度，仍有一些
共同特征。
第一节：再生资源的概念与基本特征
5
 1、功能的多样性和多宜性
 再生资源往往具有多种用途和使用价值，满足人
们的不同需要，在功能上表现出多样性和多宜性特点。
 如森林资源，既可用为单一的薪材，也可用于木
材，还可用于户外娱乐、放牧、狩猎、其他林副产品
等综合利用方式，并具有涵养水源、净化空气、保持
水土、削减噪音、美化环境等综合功能。
第一节：再生资源的概念与基本特征
6
 2、系统弹性的有限性和可恢复性
 再生资源本身是生态系统的重要组成部分，具有
生态系统的基本特征，在生态系统的结构、功能、演
化以及生态系统的自组织能力建设方面具有重要作用。
 生态系统具有稳定性，即系统持续存在或恢复其
原来状态的能力，表现出一定的系统弹性和抗干扰能
力，在其可承受的范围内，对于某种原始状态的偏离，
系统可通过其自身的调节能力和反馈机制而重新回到
原始状态或平衡状态。
第一节：再生资源的概念与基本特征
7
水体种类 更新周期 水体种类 更新周期 水体种类 更新周期
海洋 2500年 永冻层中冰 10000年 土壤水 1年
深层地下水 1400年 湖泊 17年 大气水 8天
极地冰川和
雪盖 9700年 沼泽 5年 生物水 几小时
高山冰川 1600年 河流 16天 —— ——
不同水资源状态的更新周期
第一节：再生资源的概念与基本特征
8
 3、分布的地域性和用途的相似性
 再生资源具有的多种类型，主要是受地质、地形、
气候及人类干预等多种因素长期作用的结果，上述因
子的不同组合使资源分布呈现出区域性特征。
 由于人们往往利用不同的资源生产同一类产品或
从事相似的经济活动，结果使再生资源枯竭。这就要
求我们在开发资源中遵循因地制宜原则，充分发挥地
区资源优势，建立合理的生态系统与生产布局。
第一节：再生资源的概念与基本特征
9
 4、供给数量的持续性和相对短缺性
 再生资源的再生性特点，决定了其供给数量的持
续性，只要合理利用，再生资源的供给量将持续不断。
 但是，再生资源的供给数量不会因人类需求量的
增加而增加，相反，随着人类对各类资源的需求量的
与日俱增，形成了再生资源的相对短缺性。
 因此，需要人们引入市场机制，实行资源有偿使
用和经济利用，用价值规律来调控再生资源的配置。
第一节：再生资源的概念与基本特征
1
一、可持续发展的内涵
1、可持续发展的定义
 既满足当代人的需要，又不对后代人满足其需要
的能力构成危害的发展。（布伦特兰：《我们共同的
未来》）
 该定义强调发展的公平和发展的可延续问题，认
为可持续发展满足两个条件：一是当代人的需要得到
满足，二是不对后代人满足需要的能力造成损害，即
代内公平和代际公平。
第四节：可持续发展
2
2、可持续发展的内涵
 （1）经济发展的可持续
 即要从时间纬度来看待经济发展问题，今天的经
济发展不能以损害明天的经济发展能力为代价，要用
系统的观点来统筹安排经济发展；
第四节：可持续发展
3
 （2）生态环境的可持续
 就是要求环境生态资本不随时间而下降，这就要
求经济活动等人类的一切活动要考虑到生态环境资本
的维持问题，如果人类的活动导致生态环境资本出现
下降则视为不可持续的发展；
 （3）社会可持续发展
 即要求在不同空间、不同社会群体之间实现公平
的发展，也就是说，一个区域（或群体）的发展不能
以损害其他区域（或群体）的发展为代价。
第四节：可持续发展
4
二、可持续发展的基本原则
1、公平性原则
 即不仅要实现当代人之间的公平，而且也要实现当
代人与未来各代人之间的公平。
 一是本代人的公平，即同代人之间的横向公平性；
二是代际间的公平，即世代人之间的纵向公平；
三是公平分配有限资源。
第四节：可持续发展
5
2、可持续性原则
 其核心是人类经济和社会发展不能超越资源与环
境的承载能力。
3、共同性原则
 鉴于世界各国历史、文化和发展水平的差异，可
持续发展的具体目标、政策和实施步骤不可能是唯一
的。但是，可持续发展作为全球发展的总目标，所体
现的公平性和可持续性原则应该是公共遵从的。
第四节：可持续发展
6
三、可持续发展的基本特征
1、经济发展与生态环境功能维护的统一
 在可持续发展中，生态环境的重要性大大提高，
生态环境被认为是经济发展的基础，任何破坏生态环
境的行为就是危害经济发展的行为。如果经济增长的
代价是以生态环境资本的下降为代价的，那么这种经
济增长就是不可持续的。
第四节：可持续发展
7
2、自然资本的维持优先于实物资本的生产和维持
 人类活动得到的实物资本的最初来源都是自然资
源，人类要维持经济的可持续发展就必须保证经济来
源——自然资源的可持续发展，即要保证自然资本不
会随着时间因为经济发展而下降。
第四节：可持续发展
8
3、可持续发展是一种公平的发展
 可持续发展强调公平的重要性。可持续发展不仅
要满足当代人发展的需要，还要充分考虑对后代人发
展能力的维护。在可持续发展的概念中，当代人需要
的满足不是指部分人的满足，而是要求人类整体需要
的满足，即要实现所谓的代内公平。
第四节：可持续发展
9
4、可持续发展不是要限制经济增长，而是要从长时
间角度考虑经济活动现值的最大化
 可持续发展从时间纬度和空间纬度审视经济增长，
寻求整体价值的最大，而不是部分价值的最大。 第四节：可持续发展
10
四、可持续发展的实现途径
1、将资源、环境价值纳入国民经济核算体系
 现行的经济核算体系忽视对环境资源的投入和耗
竭，不能完整地反映国民经济的运转状况，不利于可
持续发展目标的实现。
 只有通过用货币指标来反映自然资源存量的变化，
才能有效地反映可持续发展的状况。
第四节：可持续发展
11
2、推行可持续发展的产业政策
 按可持续发展的目标调整产业政策，从而将传统
国民经济体系转变为一种新型的符合可持续发展特征
的国民经济结构体系，是国家推行可持续发展的主要
途径。主要内容包括：
 （1）建立生态农业生产体系；
（2）发展节能、节材产业；
（3）形成以适度消费为特征的生产服务体系。
第四节：可持续发展
12
3、改进经济增长模式和转变消费方式
 （1）实现经济增长方式从粗放型向集约型的转变，
是保障社会经济与资源环境协调发展，实现可持续发
展战略目标的关键。
 （2）适度消费可以节约资源和保护环境，实现资
源和环境的永续利用，这与可持续发展战略的目标也
是相一致的。
第四节：可持续发展
13
4、实行自然资源保护和可持续利用
 （1）努力增加自然资源的供给。一方面要加强资
源调查勘测工作；另一方面要加强资源的培育和养护。
 （2）抑制对自然资源的需求。自然资源能否满足
发展的需要，不仅取决于资源供给总量的多少，也取
决于人们开发利用资源的速度。如果能有效地抑制对
自然资源的需求，无疑有利于资源的可持续利用。
第四节：可持续发展
14
5、调整经济政策，建立可持续发展的宏观调控体系 
 调整经济政策，使经济政策符合可持续发展的目
标，是要运用金融、价格、信贷、利息和税收等经济
杠杆，影响和调节社会生产、分配、流通、消费，限
制破坏环境的活动，促进合理开发利用自然资源，实
现可持续发展。
第四节：可持续发展
第三节 资源经济学与相关学科的关系
1
自 然 界 
自然资源 自然环境 自然灾害 自然生态
资源再生性、
资源禀赋
环境容量 风险程度 生态阈值
最大排放量 最大可承受损
失
最大开发速度 最大采伐量
人 类 社 会 
（人口/经济/社会
……）
资源需要 废弃物净化需
要
最低生存维持
需要
生命支持与舒
适性需要
第三节 资源经济学与相关学科的关系
 资源经济学、环境经济学、生态经济学
、灾害经济学揭示了人与自然关系的不同
方面，互为补充，互为支撑；
 资源经济问题与其他经济问题可互为转
换。如资源/环境、资源/生态、资源/灾害
 循环经济学不是生态经济学，涉及资源
少占、重复利用、污染少排等方面，是应
对资源、环境、生态等综合性问题的需要
2
1
完善土地经营的政策建议：
 1、根据城市土地供给与需求状况，科学确定城市
土地储备量。
 一定时期城市社会经济发展对于城市土地资源的
需求是有限的，因此，这就要求城市土地储备必须量
出为入，这是因为城市土地储备成本包括城市储备土
地取得成本、城市储备土地保有成本以及城市土地储
备机制运行风险。
第三节：主要资源类型经营分析
2
 某一时期，城市储备土地取得成本是一定的，而
保有时间越长，则保有成本(利息支付、管理成本等)
越高，同时，还可能会带来潜在的城市规划变更风险、
城市土地市场运行风险以及通货膨胀风险。只有量出
为入，才能有效降低城市储备的保有成本和城市土地
储备机制运行风险，从而促进城市土地储备运行效率
的提高。
第三节：主要资源类型经营分析
3
 2、区分公益性储备与商业性储备，增加城市公共
物品和住房供给的土地供应量。
 为了实现不同时期地产价格的均衡波动，平衡地
产供需矛盾，一些国家或地区都实行了土地储备制度，
旨在通过调控土地供求关系，抑制地价过度上涨，创
造良好的都市发展环境，持续供给都市发展的地产尤
其是住宅用地，从而推进都市的建设与发展。
第三节：主要资源类型经营分析
4
 我国目前城市地产储备
主要是着眼于短期的地产增
值，并存在着适用范围过广
的问题，一定程度上造成了
政府对于地产经营的过度垄
断，而影响了地产开发商的
投资建设积极性。因此，必
须作出相应的改革。
第三节：主要资源类型经营分析
5
改革土地储备制度：
 （1）区分公益性储备和商业性储备，将城市建设
中的划拔土地纳入公益性储备的范畴；
 （2）在储备土地收益分享中，在安置失业人员和
偿还欠债的基础上，要考虑到企业的更新改造；
 （3）效仿我国香港和澳门地区的做法，建立土地
基金制度，从而拓宽城市土地资产经营的资金来源。
第三节：主要资源类型经营分析
6
 3、推进城市土地证券化。
 由于城市土地具有很强的增值功能，尤其是我国
当前处于快速城市化发展时期，对于城市土地资源的
需求量大，因此，城市土地资源资产的增值潜力也大。
据此，可以实行土地资本化运作，通过金融商品创新，
来推进城市土地储备机制的高效运行。
 如通过城市土地证券化，来筹集资金。同时对于
城市土地征用，也可以采取证券化的方式，以降低城
市建设的成本，同时又可以使农户获得持久的收入。
第三节：主要资源类型经营分析
7
 4、增设土地发展权，提高
轨道交通建设效益。
 轨道交通的建设将带来周边
土地利用结构的变化，以及通达
性的提高，从而促进土地价值的
升值。在香港进行的地铁建设中，
就通过增设土地发展权的方式，
带动周边土地的开发与经营，从
而为地铁建设融资。
第三节：主要资源类型经营分析
8
案例：兴化新思路运作城市土地经营
 城建资金短缺，曾一直是制约经济欠发达地区中小城
市建设与发展的“瓶颈”
。
 江苏省兴化市在旧城改造中改变了以往协议出让土地
的方式，通过银行融资先行投入房屋拆迁和基础设施配套，
促使地块增值，仅1.5亿投入吸引外地民间投资城建资金8
亿元，成功进行了市中心和新区的城建改造。
第三节：主要资源类型经营分析
9
二、景观经营
 目前一些地方景点采取了经营
权转让、景点深度开发等模式，一
些做法值得进一步探讨或思考，尤
其是要注意景观开发与其文化脉络
的相承与保存。这里主要是结合城
市景观对于城市房地产价格的辐射
价值来探讨如何更为有效地激发城
市景观资源价值。
第三节：主要资源类型经营分析
10
影响房地产价格的因素是多方面的，包括：
①景观地附近土地获得成本高；
②景观地通常水文地质环境复杂，建筑相关成本较高；
③景观地区地产一般倾向低密度设计；
④景观住宅已成为人们所推崇的一种居住方式，城市居
民有较高的支付意愿等。
第三节：主要资源类型经营分析
溱湖畔“华侨城地产”
11
 对于某一城市景观，
在空间上没有遮蔽效果的
情况下，其享乐(Hedonic)
价值随着地产位置的远离
而逐渐减少，到一定距离
时便不产生影响；但如果
一旦出现遮蔽效果，即较
近的高层建筑对后方建筑
形成景观障碍，那么景观
享乐价值将大打折扣。
第三节：主要资源类型经营分析
高楼围困长沙“天心
阁”
，开发商破坏古
城景观
12
 如何实现景观对地
产外溢价值的最大化？
 （1）当地产价格与
城市景观的距离比较敏
感时，应当以离景观距
离较近处着重开发，以
实现享乐价值的最大化，
这种情况也适用于景观
规模较小的情况。
南京鼓楼
第三节：主要资源类型经营分析
13
 （2）如果地产价格与城市景观的距离并不十分敏
感，那么充分利用景观的视觉纵深才是明智之举，相
应的，在距离近的地块应建造低密度的中低层建筑，
向外可以逐渐提高建筑高度。
第三节：主要资源类型经营分析
14
 因此，在大中型景观的影响区域内，应考虑更多
的公益性，在景观最毗邻区发展低密度的中低层建筑
为主，往外逐步提高建筑密度和建筑高度。如此，可
以使自然景观的价值得到充分的利用，以实现景观对
地产外溢价值的最大化。
 如果在最毗邻区开展掠夺式的开发，不仅会对毗
邻区的地产形成严重的景观遮蔽，而且会对原景观产
生胁迫效应，大大地降低景观邻近区的土地价格。
第三节：主要资源类型经营分析
15
如何实现对景观地产的优化管理？
 （1）建筑高度
 对于建筑高度的控制可以保证景观的视觉空间开
敞、丰富而具有美感。如在滨水区的详细规划中，随
着建筑位置的退后，高度渐次增高；越接近滨水区域，
建筑高度越低，以保证可以为更多的居住者提供观赏
水景的条件。
第三节：主要资源类型经营分析
16
 （2）建筑形态
 为了保证景观的通视性和层次感，景观地周边的
建筑设计应当控制建筑密度和容积率，而建筑形态也
需要控制，如严格避免建造景观遮挡严重的板式建筑，
避免与景观天际线不和谐的屋顶形式。
 （3）底层设计
 城市景观区往往是公共活动场所，因此在设计时
要考虑在建筑底层中创造出一个开放式的公共活动空
间，以提高景观空间的容量。
第三节：主要资源类型经营分析
17
三、保护区经营
 建立自然保护区是保护生物多样性的最有效途径。
 但是自然保护区的建设与发展，不仅要占用大量
的财政资金，而且其维护与管理也需要大量的投资，
这往往会造成建而疏管，从而使得自然保护区难以发
挥有效的作用。因此，如何引入经营理念，对自然保
护区管理进行制度创新，将是十分重要的。
第三节：主要资源类型经营分析
18
 从经营角度来看，自然保护区经营必须遵循以下
几个方面原则：
 一是适度经营原则。其经营必须在生态容量允许
的范围内，因此，在保护区内也存在根据核心保护区、
重点保护区、外围保护区的差异性，确定不同的经营
方式及程度，而且要通过经营，使得自然保护区的生
态价值得以提升。我国一些具有旅游景点价值的自然
资源，也是由于过度开发或经营，而在一定程度上造
成了其生态价值的贬值。
第三节：主要资源类型经营分析
19
 二是社区参与原则。自然保护区
的经营必须与当地政府尤其是社区居
民的利益进行有效结合，这样就可以
使社区居民成为自然保护区建设与管
理的支持力量，而且也可以弥补因为
自然保护区建设而带来的居民发展机
会损失，从而使得居民通过参与自然
保护区管理得到必要的生态补偿。
第三节：主要资源类型经营分析
20
 三是利益相关者原则。除了考
虑社区居民这一利益相关者，还要
考虑非政府组织、科研院所等组织
及个人对于自然保护区的作用。例
如，有的可以通过有关社团组织自
然资源保护区的维护与管理；有的
可以让科研院所通过研究基地方式
介入管理等。
第三节：主要资源类型经营分析
1
第三节：再生资源开发利用模式
一、再生资源开发利用模式：以渔业资源为例
 对可再生资源合理使用的分析，一般是从两个角度
展开的，一是纯生物学角度，一是经济学角度。
 生物学理论认为，当可再生资源的平均年增长量最
大时，是合理使用的最优点。
 经济学观点则认为当延迟使用的边际成本等于边际
收益时，是合理使用的最优点。
2
 1、开发利用原理
 图1为渔业资源可持续捕捞曲线，
其中，MSY为最大可持续产量，但是
在现实的渔业生产活动中，由于受
到渔业捕捞作业能力和投入能力的
限制，经济学上的实际捕捞量为渔
业捕捞投入成本TC与可持续曲线的
交点（图2）。
第三节：再生资源开发利用模式
3
Xmax
MSY
X0 供给（X）
增长率
图 1
第三节：再生资源开发利用模式
4
HPROF
HOA
TR=P*H
O EPROF EOA EMAX
作用力E
TC=W*E
收入和成本
图 2
第三节：再生资源开发利用模式
5
 2、开发利用模式
 渔业生长是呈现
Logstic曲线增长的，
因此在渔业发展的不
同时期需要采取不同
的对策措施，以实现
渔业资源的可持续利
X0 时间 用管理。
存量（X）
Xmax
Xmin
第三节：再生资源开发利用模式
6
阶段 问题 资源评估建议
发展不足
渔业如何才能发展，资源是否大
到足以证明可以用大的努力量来
发展渔业生产
可能年产量的粗略估算
增长
问题明显减少，实际上，当接近
资源限度时，出现的问题是如何
降低渔业增长率，从而减少或消
除以后由于过度发展造成的危险
持续产量和所需要的努力量（了解不同类
型渔船的数量）的较精确估计
发展过度
超容量，渔获率下降（有时总渔
获下降），经济亏损，不同部门
的渔民之间发生冲突
为了达到渔业管理的目标（目标必须简捷
明了）所必要的专门措施（网目尺寸限制、
渔获量限制，禁渔期的长短）的明确建议
管理
（恢复）
调整管理措施（如限额的大小），
以考虑如补充量的自然波动或相
关鱼种的渔业发展
对于主要根据单鱼种模式的年捕捞限额提
出的调整性的精确和明了的意见。
对于修正决策以考虑鱼种相互影响的更为
战略性而较为定量性的建议
渔业发展不同阶段的持续性问题及管理对策
第三节：再生资源开发利用模式
7
 3、配套政策措施
 自1979年以来，我国曾先后制订了一些渔业资
源保护的措施，力图保护渔业资源。这些制度包括：
 （1）休渔制度：
 具体是：保护区制度、禁渔区和禁渔期、伏季
休渔；
第三节：再生资源开发利用模式
8
第三节：再生资源开发利用模式
（2）捕捞许可制度；
（3）网目尺寸限制和渔获物幼鱼比例检查；
（4）制订海洋捕捞强度的控制指标；
（5）人工增殖制度；
（6）渔业资源增殖保护费的征收制度；
（7）其他制度：
 包括：200海里专属经济区制度，1998年起
开始实施的海洋捕捞渔业零增长制度等。
9
二、再生资源开发利用模式：以东太湖围
网养殖为例
 东太湖是太湖东南部东山半岛东侧的一个湖湾，隶属
江苏省苏州市管辖。是苏州、上海及浙东地区主要水源地。
东太湖的围网养殖始于20世纪80年代初期，自1993年以来
网围养殖得到了迅猛发展，2000年网围遍布全湖，净养殖
面积2833hm2；养殖产量3317t，产值将近亿元，其中养蟹
面积和产值占网围养殖面积和总产值的80％以上。
第三节：再生资源开发利用模式
10
 1、问题的产生
 伴随着东太湖养殖面积和养殖
产量的迅速扩大，东太湖的生态环
境发生了较大的变化，水质有明显
下降，至1999年，全年平均水质已
经达到了地表水V类水质标准，富
营养化趋势加快，目前的东太湖已
经处于中富营养状态，生物群落剧
烈变化：浮游藻类数量明显增加。
第三节：再生资源开发利用模式
11
 2、问题的根源
 出现这一问题的原因有两个：一是网箱设置过
密；二是整体养殖容量也大大超出港湾环境的生态
容纳量。
 因此,太湖渔管会严格控制太湖的网箱养殖总面
积，并在太湖水污染防治“十五”规划中提出东太
湖围网养殖面积要控制在1667公顷（2.5万亩）以内，
其中1万亩轮休，实际养殖面积为1.5万亩。
第三节：再生资源开发利用模式
12
 3、网箱养殖的负面影响
 （1）湖区生态系统结构的改变。整个湖泊生态
系统由此而发生扭曲，自然生态结构和功能在一定
程度上遭受破坏。
 （2）湖区生态系统功能的弱化。妨碍收割利用
水草；滥种茭草形成静水环境，使东太湖的自净能
力下降，将影响东太湖的供水、蓄水、排洪等功能
的发挥。
第三节：再生资源开发利用模式
13
 （3）天然渔业资源的损失。大规模网箱养殖的
出现使养殖鱼类在湖体中占绝对优势，加之水质污
染，许多天然的特色种、稀有种在太湖中正在减少，
生物多样性得不到有效的保证。
 （4）对水文动力环境的改变。大面积高密度的
网箱设置，整体上大大提高了对水流的阻滞能力，
水体交换量与水流速减少，使泥沙淤积加大，水域
面积缩小，水量减少，湖泊的蓄洪、泻洪能力下降，
水体自净能力减弱，而入湖污染物都逐渐增加，也
影响了渔业自身的发展。
第三节：再生资源开发利用模式
14
 （5）对旅游资源的影响。围网造成的景观破碎
化以及水质污染，使太湖旅游资源受到影响。
 （6）水质恶化。网箱养殖使耗氧量大量增加，
TN、TP和有机物含量也大幅度上升。
 （7）底质的污染。大量的沉降物(过剩饵料和排
泄物)，长期淤积，在水底腐烂发臭，一有波动，就
使水体混浊，易使有害的微生物滋生，病害蔓延，
甚至发生“死鱼”事故。
第三节：再生资源开发利用模式
15
 （8）养殖水产品的产量和品质下降。某些传统的
水产品鲜味下降，药物、抗生素等饲料添加剂有毒副
作用和残留，致使水产品产生耐药性和产生癌变、畸
形、突变等弊端，影响人体健康和生态环境。
 经测算，1984年至1999年网箱养殖的总产值约为
6.1亿元，而网箱养殖所造成的水资源的耗竭、生物
资源（渔业资源）的损失、蓄水及排洪功能的减弱等
生态成本为11.05亿元，是养殖产值的1.81倍，因此，
东太湖当前的投饵网箱养殖方式必须进行改革。
第三节：再生资源开发利用模式
16
水资源质量与
数量的下降
水产产量下降
水产质量下降
效益下降
加大养殖面积
加大养殖密度
加大投饵量
网箱养鱼
饵料
药物
藻类
其它污染
病死鱼
传统的高密度投饵网箱养殖的环境胁迫效应机制
第三节：再生资源开发利用模式
17
 4、改革与完善思路
 （1）控制网围养殖面积总量，并逐步减少。
 适度进行网围养殖，对于湖区生态保护和发展农
业经济都是有积极意义的。因此，当前网围养殖面积
必须控制在生态容受的范围内。此外，抓紧制订并积
极实施湖泊综合规划，从而协调湖泊渔业规划、湖泊
湿地保护规划、湖泊水资源利用规划、湖泊矿产开发
规划等之间的矛盾，促进湖泊资源可持续利用管理。
第三节：再生资源开发利用模式
18
 （2）促进网围养殖的清洁生产。
 研制密度小、悬浮性好饵料；
 建立生态缓冲区，保证水体的自净能力；
 采取轮休或多元化养殖措施，降低湖区生态压力，
并按照不同鱼类的栖息水层，合理利用空间；
 做好病虫害与自然灾害的防御与减灾措施研究；
 限制药物、抗生素等添加剂等；
 通过人工清洗围网，防止藻类衍生等。
第三节：再生资源开发利用模式
19
 （3）完善网围养殖的产权制度。
 建立水权制度，尤其是完善水面利用权的产权界定；
 核定养殖许可证。根据湖区生态容量，核定网围养
殖的许可证数量；
 采取市场招标、拍卖方式，分配许可证。许可证的
底价，应该包括网围养殖的生态环境成本，以通过
生态环境成本的内部化，增加养殖者的经济成本，
提高养殖者保护湖区生态环境的自觉性。
第三节：再生资源开发利用模式
第二节 资源经济学与专业教育 
 资源经济问题的永恒性与经济学、地理
学、海洋科学、环境科学、管理等学科的
不断深化发展；
 资源经济学是开展相关学科科学研究与
实践工作的重要基础与方法支撑；
 资源经济是成长中资源科学的重要基础
性学科。
1
第二节 资源经济学与专业教育 
 资源经济问题的永恒性与经济学、地理
学、海洋科学、环境科学、管理等学科的
不断深化发展；
 资源经济学是开展相关学科科学研究与
实践工作的重要基础与方法支撑；
 资源经济是成长中资源科学的重要基础
性学科。
2
1
第二节：再生资源开发利用决策
一、再生资源开发利用决策的基本原则
 再生资源的开发利用过程表现为某一产业的经济
再生产和自然再生产的双重过程。合理开发利用再生
资源就是要发挥资源优势，建立一个合理的、高效的、
可调控的和永续利用的生态经济系统结构，其特征是
“生态—经济—社会效益”的高度协调统一。
 鉴于不同再生资源具有各自的特殊性，这里分析
主要的再生资源的开发利用决策原则。
2
 1、水资源的开发利用 
 水资源是指具有经济利
用价值的自然水，主要是指
逐年可以恢复和更新的淡水，
其资源量不足全球水量的3%，
地球上水量分布及实现重复
更新供应的水文循环过程如
后图所示。
第二节：再生资源开发利用决策
3
第二节：再生资源开发利用决策
4
第二节：再生资源开发利用决策
5
水资源的开发利用决策应遵循以下原则：
 （1）综合规划、合理利用原则
 必须在摸清其数量、质量、时空分布规律的基础
上，根据经济发展、生态环境、社会稳定等对水资源
的需求情况，综合规划，合理配置，做到工程与资源
相结合，工程与生态相结合，实现其合理利用。
第二节：再生资源开发利用决策
6
 （2）开源节流和科学用水原则
 水资源短缺问题现在已成为世界关注的问题，面
对这已日趋严重的问题，我们应在积极开发水源的同
时节约用水。合理耕作和种植、增加防渗措施，采用
先进的灌溉技术等以实现农业节水，提高水的循环使
用率和重复使用率以实现工业节水等，同时，因地制
宜地兴建生物或污水处理厂以净化水资源。
第二节：再生资源开发利用决策
7
 （3）流域整体性原则
 水资源形成于水文循环过程中，其开发利用一是
兴利，二是防害，三是保护和改善生态环境。三者相
辅相成，构成开发利用的整体性。因此，为了实现水
资源开发利用三者的协调统一，必须从流域整体性出
发兼顾流域上中下游、左右岸的相互关系，坚持生物
措施与工程措施相结合，避免偏面强调水利工程而忽
视环境响应。
第二节：再生资源开发利用决策
8
例如：
 大坝建设固然在水资源时空再分配过程中发挥了
重要作用，大量农田得到灌溉，粮食产量大幅度提升，
但与此同时也造成河流的断裂化，减少流域下游土壤
肥力的自然补充，影响河口三角洲的水沙平衡，阻隔
水生生物尤其是回游类生物的通道，减少生物多样性。
因此，流域水资源开发利用必须从整体性出发，坚持
资源水利观念和可持续水利观念。
第二节：再生资源开发利用决策
9
 （4）遵循生态平衡原则
 水资源中蕴藏着巨大的能量，开发利用水资源，
修建水电站是许多国家解决能源问题的重要途径。
 但是，水利工程的建设将改变水资源的时空分布，
不可避免地会对整个流域的生态环境、地质构造、生
物种类产生影响。
 因此，工程上马前必须进行认真研究、调查、模
拟试验和严格的专家论证，力争把环境损失降低到最
低限度。
第二节：再生资源开发利用决策
10
 2、土地资源的开发利用
 （1）因地制宜原则
 由于土地资源有较明显的地域性
和生物资源对其生存环境的适应性，
因此，确定土地利用方向必须树立地
域观念，根据当地客观条件和国民经
济需要，科学的评价土地利用的适宜
性及生产潜力，确定用地方向。
第二节：再生资源开发利用决策
11
 合理开发利用土地资源，除了注意自然环境的适
宜性外，还要考虑到社会经济的合理性和科技条件的
可能性，使不同类型的生产部门科学合理的地域组合，
真正做到“宜农则农”
、
“宜林则林”
、
“宜牧则
牧”
，建设用地扩张与耕地保护相结合，城市化进程
与“三农”问题相结合，因地制宜合理利用极为有限
的土地资源。
第二节：再生资源开发利用决策
12
 （2）节约集约用地原则
 我国正处于经济快速发展、城市化水平水平提
升、农地非农化明显加快、建设用地需求大量增加
的过程之中，而与世界上大部分国家相比，我国的
基本国情是人多地少，耕地更少，这就决定了我国
只能走土地节约集约利用的道路，坚持节约集约用
地原则。
第二节：再生资源开发利用决策
13
 （3）生态、经济、社会效益相结合原则
 生态效益的实质是社会、经济效益的一种表现
形式，它们之间存在着一种转化机能，提高生态效
益就等于增加了未来的经济、社会效益，他是后者
的基础和保障。所以，在维护生态效益、保持生态
平衡的前提下，开发利用土地资源应作为今后的主
要方向。
第二节：再生资源开发利用决策
14
 （4）宜农地优先用于农业的原则
 随着经济发展和增长，土地将不可避免的转入
非农建设用地，所以，保护耕地资源已成为一项十
分紧迫的课题。
 尤其是像我国这样一个拥有众多人口的发展中
国家，粮食和其他农产品的基本自给只能建立在自
力更生的基础上，而依靠进口是不切实际的。
 因此，必须坚持宜农地优先用于农业的原则，
把保证农用地放在一切土地利用的首位。
第二节：再生资源开发利用决策
15
 3、森林资源的开发利用
 森林是地球生物圈中最大的生
物群落和生态系统。森林资源的开
发利用所形成的产业是一个知识密
集型的综合产业，其中包括种植业、
养殖业、森林采伐、运输、木材生
产、加工、林产化学工业、野生动
植物保护等，所以，它兼有工业和
农业两种特点。
第二节：再生资源开发利用决策
16
 （1）坚持“以林为主，多种经营”的生产方针
 森林是林区的主要资源和植被，也是经过长期
自然进化而形成的稳定的生态系统。
 森林的消失不仅能影响本地的气候、水文及农
业生产，还将造成流域水土流失，土地退化，及至
下游河道淤积，增加洪涝灾害，威胁下游地区人民
生命及财产的安全等，并将影响更大范围甚至全球
范围的气候变化、水文循环。
第二节：再生资源开发利用决策
17
 （2）遵循永续利用，采育平衡原则
 为了实现森林资源的永续利用，必须做到采育
平衡，即以营林为主，采伐量不超过生长量。
 应避免竭泽而渔，乱砍滥伐，忽视造林、育林，
对森林实行掠夺式的经营。
 应坚持植树造林、采育并举、采育平衡等多种
措施相配合，提高森林覆盖率，且要注意合理的林
种结构，加强森林生态系统的复杂性和稳定性。
第二节：再生资源开发利用决策
18
 （3）遵循立体经营、多边利用原则
 立体经营是指充分利用其复杂的空间结构，发
展和经营不同的产品生产，如在林下种植土特产品、
菌类生产等等。
 随着经济发展，目前发达国家的森林经营已达
到了多边利用的新阶段，即确定了从宏观角度来实
现森林的全部功能和永续利用的经营方式。
第二节：再生资源开发利用决策
19
 （4）遵循木材的综合利用原则
 木材利用率高低是衡量一个国家木材加工业和
森林利用水平的主要指标之一。
 目前一些北欧国家木材加工剩余物利用率高达
95%，经过多次加工、利用，每立方米木材利用价值
高达1600元，而我国仅280元左右。
 因此，对于木材资源，亦要坚持综合利用原则，
提高木材利用率，减少森林资源的消耗。
第二节：再生资源开发利用决策
20
二、再生资源开发利用决策的依据
 与耗竭性资源的开发利用决策依据相类似，再
生资源开发利用决策依据亦包括资源利用的帕累托
最优、资源利用与外部性问题、资源利用的市场机
制以及资源利益的结构安排等方面。
 这里对江苏主要再生资源作一分析。
第二节：再生资源开发利用决策
21
 （1）合理利用和保护水资源
 在江苏省的水资源利用问题中，较为严重的是水
资源年度季节分配不均，容易发生洪涝灾害，此外由
于工矿企业排放废水和人工养殖而引发的水质恶化现
象也是一个不容忽视的问题；
 因此，主要应注意水资源的保护和节约利用，对
流经本地区的河段，必须保护其水质的质量，要严格
控制工业和生活废水的排放，同时，采取各种措施节
约利用水资源。
第二节：再生资源开发利用决策
22
 （2）重视海洋资源开发与保护
 江苏省海洋资源丰富，其中海涂面积为6570平方
公里。处于北亚热带与暖温带之间，并兼受海洋性、
大陆性气候的双重作用，各种自然过程活跃，物质能
量交换迅速，气候资源丰富多样，有利于农、盐、林、
牧、副、渔各业生产，但生态较为脆弱。需要处理好
开发与保护之间的相互关系。
第二节：再生资源开发利用决策
23
 （3）合理保护耕地资源
 人多地少是江苏省土地利用的现状，人增地（耕
地）减难以逆转，吃饭和建设问题所造成的用地矛盾
将越来越突出。
 要缓解这种紧张的状态必须要通过加强基本农田
保护，改造中、低产田，提高单位面积产量和提高复
种指数等办法来实现。
第二节：再生资源开发利用决策
24
 （4）大力开发可再生能源和生物能量
 江苏省沿海滩涂区域海岸线长，地势平缓，具有
大规模开发风能、建设大型风电场的良好条件。目前
江苏业已在如东县和东台市建设风力发电项目，这对
于建立沿海清洁能源产业区具有较强的示范效应。
 江苏省也有丰富的生物资源，目前主要是通过秸
杆焚烧发电，如果能够开发生物量发电技术，则生物
能源开发的前景将更为广阔。
第二节：再生资源开发利用决策
25
案例：江苏每年产生的农作物秸秆约3000万吨，相当于整
个徐州矿业集团年煤产量的70%左右。以往这些秸秆的相
当一部分被直接燃烧，不仅浪费了能源，也对环境造成了
污染。目前，江苏已在如东发展了生物质能发电示范项目，
建设规模达2.4万千瓦，年秸秆消耗量为17万吨，增加农
民收入3000多万元。秸秆燃烧后的底灰、炭灰无偿返还给
当地农民，作为耕种肥料，实现综合利用。
第二节：再生资源开发利用决策
























1
第二节：资源资产与资源经营模式
 资源能够经营的根本原因在于资源的资产性特征。
因此，资源经营实质就是资源资产经营。
一、资源资产及其特征
 资源资产是自然资源的自然特征与资产属性的耦
合。有关资源资产主要有以下几个方面的理解：
 （1）财产角度，（2）经营特征，（3）价值属
性，（4）自然属性。
2
 1、从财产角度来看
 认为资源资产是同自然资源价值密切相关的一个
概念，是资源价值在财产关系上的表现，是人类资产
和财富的重要组成部分。资源资产通常指受人类直接
或间接影响的，实际的或潜在的自然资源存量，其中
包括一部分在经济活动参与下形成的资源存量，它们
既表现为实物量，也表现为价值量及所有者的“财产
权”
，资源资产中比较重要的组成部分有：生物、土
地及相关生态系统、水及相关生态系统、地下矿产资
源及空气等。
第二节：资源资产与资源经营模式
3
 2、从经营特征来看
 认为资源资产是一种多态、多途、多属性的资产。
它可以具有经营性和非经营性，而且在一定条件下可
以相互转化。作为经营性属性，它带来经济效益；作
为非经营性，它带来社会效益或间接效益。所以，一
般将其界定为：在人们现有的认识和现实的科技水平
下，其开发利用能带来一定经济价值的资源。所谓
“一定”是一个尚待研究的指标体系。它包括：对实
物量有一定要求，对存量的测定有一定的精度要求，
对技术和经济价值有一定效益和指标要求等。
第二节：资源资产与资源经营模式
4
 3、从价值属性来看
 认为资源资产是国家、企业或个人所拥有的，
具有市场价值或潜在交换价值的，以自然资源形式
存在的有形资产。
 4、从自然属性来看
 认为资源资产就是自然资本，包括自然资产和
环境资产，如土壤肥力、森林、渔业资源、净化能
力、石油、煤气、臭氧层以及生物化学循环等都是
自然资本。
第二节：资源资产与资源经营模式
5
基于上述认识
 我们认为资源资产是指在一定或预期的技术经
济条件下能够给所有者带来效益的稀缺自然资源。
 因此，资源资产并不是资源的别称，它们之间
存在着本质的区别，资源转化为资源资产是有一定
条件的，其基本条件是：具有稀缺性、收益性以及
可占用性。
第二节：资源资产与资源经营模式
6
类别 资源资产 资产
形成 主要天然形成，现在逐渐演变
为自然与劳动的联合产品 人工劳动的产品
价值 有使用价值、价值和生态价值 只有使用价值和价值
折旧 有的使用后无法补偿，有的通
过技术、价值等途径补偿
价值在生产过程中消耗，并以
折旧的方式得到补偿或更新
核算
核算历史较短，在国民帐户中
还没有地位，可操作性差，理
论渐趋成熟
核算历史长，在国民帐户上得
到体现，可操作性强，理论成
熟
市场化 市场化程度极低，变现能力弱 市场化程度高，变现能力强
使用 目标多，用途和涉及面广，须
顾及生态等多方面 用途比较单一，目标少
效益 同时具备经济效益、社会效益
和生态效益
具有经济效益、社会效益，生
态效益弱化
公益性 公益性强，通常具有公共产品
特征 绝大多数不具有公共产品特征
资
源
资
产
与
资
产
比
较
第二节：资源资产与资源经营模式
7
二、资源经营模式分析
 1、产业经营模式
 自然资源产业主要涉及到矿产资源、海洋资源、
林业资源、供水及给排水、风能开发、潮汐能开发、
土地整理、农业资源开发等产业行业或部门，通过产
业化运作机制，可以提高这些部门或行业自然资源开
发利用效率。
第二节：资源资产与资源经营模式
8
 自然资源的产业化开发利
用，需要更加尊重自然规律、
生态规律，这样才能发挥更为
持久的生产力效率。此外，要
防止出现自然资源尤其是矿产
产业开发中的二元经济形态。
 案例：赞比亚的铜矿开发
赞比亚谦比西铜矿
第二节：资源资产与资源经营模式
9
 赞比亚在1964年独立时，尽管约有40年大规模铜矿开
采的历史，但仍然是一个农民经济占主导的国家。
 而之所以铜矿开采未能通过创造资本，而带来相关产
业部门的发展，主要是采矿业在与产生二元经济的联系方
面是很典型的，出口指向的采矿部门一直是与传统的民生
经济很少联系的一块飞地。
 因此，自然资源产业的发展也需要与当地相关产业结
合起来，才能更有效地带动国家或者地区经济的发展。
第二节：资源资产与资源经营模式
10
 2、产权经营模式
 产权经营主要通过自然资源产权市场的作用，实
现自然资源产权的优化配置，如矿产资源的采矿权配
置、土地资源使用权配置，此外，还有渔业捕捞权、
海洋资源使用权等，其是以自然资源产权界定和分配
为基础的。
 相关内容可参考第三章“资源产权”部分。
第二节：资源资产与资源经营模式
11
 3、生态经营模式
 生态经营就是将资源经营的理念引入生态资源保
护中，从而促进生态资源资产的保值增值。
 例如，从城市生态经营角度来看，如何通过城市
生态经营理念的实施来推进城市生态系统运行中生态
环境问题的有效解决呢？
第二节：资源资产与资源经营模式
12
 主要思路是：（1）促进生物系统、资源环境系
统与人工物质系统的融合，通过生物系统、资源环境
系统的引入，来实现人工物质系统的增值，并提高城
市生态系统的自组织、自净化能力；（2）根据城市
不同收入群体对于生态环境需求而导致的支付能力的
差异性，在城市生态系统中创造出相应的城市生态产
品满足不同收入群体的需求；（3）构建相应的机制，
为城市生态经营的持续发展提供动力。
第二节：资源资产与资源经营模式
13
案例：都江堰
 都江堰是当今世界年代久远、唯一留存、以无坝引水
为特征的宏大水利工程。其创建以不破坏自然资源，充分
利用自然资源为人类服务为前提，变害为利，使人、地、
水三者高度协调统一，是全世界迄今为止仅存的一项伟大
的“生态工程”
。
 都江堰工程包括鱼嘴、飞沙堰和宝瓶口三个主要组成
部分。
第二节：资源资产与资源经营模式
14
 鱼嘴是在岷江
江心修筑的分水
堤坝，形似大鱼
卧伏江中，它把
岷江分为内江和
外江，内江用于
灌溉，外江用于
排洪。
第二节：资源资产与资源经营模式
15
 飞 沙 堰 是 在 分
水堤坝中段修建
的泄洪道，洪水
期不仅泄洪水，
还利用水漫过飞
沙堰流入外江水
流的漩涡作用，
有效地减少了泥
沙在宝瓶口前后
的淤积。
第二节：资源资产与资源经营模式
16
 宝瓶口是内
江的进水口，
形似瓶颈。除
了引水，还有
控制进水流量
的作用。
第二节：资源资产与资源经营模式
17
 总之，都江堰水利工程充分
利用当地西北高、东南低的地
理条件，根据江河出山口处特
殊的地形、水脉、水势，乘势
利导，无坝引水，自流灌溉，
使堤防、分水、泄洪、排沙、
控流相互依存，共为体系，保
证了防洪、灌溉、水运和社会
用水综合效益的充分发挥。
第二节：资源资产与资源经营模式
18
 4、技术经营模式
 作为自然资源，需要不断采取新的生态技术，以
发挥自然资源资本共生共进效应，以追求长期的整体
盈利最大化。
 例如，农业资源利用将传统农业技术与现代生态
技术融合，实施秸杆的过腹还田，采用青储、氨化技
术，可以实现食物链的物质转化功能；此外，牲蓄粪
便沼气化、残渣还田、改良土壤，也能够实现系统整
体产出价值的最大化。
第二节：资源资产与资源经营模式
19
 现代工业系统同样可以模仿生态资源系统的运行
与生物圈兼容，以提高资源利用效率，促进资源循环
利用，并在工业企业之间建立生态联接。
 例如，生态技术应用于食品加工业，可大大缩短
发酵周期；应用于化学工业，清洁的微生物生产工艺
可以取代高能耗、重污染的化学工艺；应用于医药工
业，可以发展现代生物制药。
第二节：资源资产与资源经营模式
20
 5、营销经营模式
 随着人类社会对于亲近自然需求的增长，人们也
提出了自然资源营销策略。如为了推进旅游产业的发
展，提出了生态旅游的概念；为了推进房地产业的发
展，尤其是建立生态人居体系，也提出了生态家园等
类似概念，并且在实践中得到了积极的应用与发展。
第二节：资源资产与资源经营模式
21
案例1：
 世界上第一座城市
的综合性环境教育和城
市生态环境公园：成都
府南河活水公园
第二节：资源资产与资源经营模式
22
 活水公园从1997年春天破土动工，到初步完工，投资
达3000万元人民币，其建设自始至终受到国内外超乎寻常
的关注。
 建成后的活水公园一方面改善了生态环境，获得了良
好的生态效益，另一方面利用土地的生态消解功能减轻了
污染治理费用，同时提升了周边土地价值，增加了旅游收
入。可以说，其所获得的综合效益远远大于其建设投入的
3000万资金。
第二节：资源资产与资源经营模式
23
案例2：上海梦清园
 上海苏州河上的梦清园是
上海首个活水公园，它呈三面
环水的半岛状。该公园的建成
使得该地区呈现出三个亮点：
亮点一是观景阁上赏樱花、亮
点二是小鱼岛上的离散树、亮
点三是游艇码头靓丽造型。在
梦清园周边生态环境逐渐改善
的同时，苏州河也变清，周边
房地产也升值很快。
第二节：资源资产与资源经营模式
J. Geogr. Sci. 2011, 21(2): 285-300 
DOI: 10.1007/s11442-011-0845-6
© 2011 Science Press Springer-Verlag 
 
Received: 2010-08-27 Accepted: 2010-09-30 
Foundation: National Social Science Foundation of China, No.10ZD&M030; Non-profit Industry Financial Program of 
Ministry of Land and Resources of China, No.200811033; Environment Protection Scientific Foundation of 
Jiangsu Province, China, No.2009037 
Author: Zhao Rongqin (1978−), Ph.D Candidate, lecturer, specialized in carbon cycle and low-carbon economy. 
E-mail: zhaorq234@163.com *
Corresponding author: Huang Xianjin (1968−), Professor, specialized in land use and resources & environmental economics. E-mail: hxj369@nju.edu.cn 
 www.geogsci.com springerlink.com/content/1009-637X
Carbon footprint of different industrial spaces 
based on energy consumption in China 
ZHAO Rongqin1,2, *
HUANG Xianjin1
, ZHONG Taiyang1
, PENG Jiawen1
1. School of Geographic & Oceanographic Sciences, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210093, China; 
2. College of Resources and Environment, North China Institute of Water Conservancy and Hydroelectric 
Power, Zhengzhou 450011, China 
Abstract: Using energy consumption and land use data of each region of China in 2007, this 
paper established carbon emission and carbon footprint model based on energy consumption, 
and estimated the carbon emission amount of fossil energy and rural biomass energy of different regions of China in 2007. Through matching the energy consumption items with industrial spaces, this paper divided industrial spaces into five types: agricultural space, living & 
industrial-commercial space, transportation industrial space, fishery and water conservancy 
space, and other industrial space. Then the author analyzed the carbon emission intensity 
and carbon footprint of each industrial space. Finally, advices of decreasing industrial carbon 
footprint and optimizing industrial space pattern were put forward. The main conclusions are 
as following: (1) Total amount of carbon emission from energy consumption of China in 2007 
was about 1.65 GtC, in which the proportion of carbon emission from fossil energy was 89%. 
(2) Carbon emission intensity of industrial space of China in 2007 was 1.98 t/hm2
, in which, 
carbon emission intensity of living & industrial-commercial space and of transportation industrial space was 55.16 t/hm2 and 49.65 t/hm2 respectively, they were high-carbon-emission 
industrial spaces among others. (3) Carbon footprint caused by industrial activities of China in 
2007 was 522.34×106
 hm2
, which brought about ecological deficit of 28.69×106
 hm2
, which 
means that the productive lands were not sufficient to compensate for carbon footprint of 
industrial activities, and the compensating rate was 94.5%. As to the regional carbon footprint, 
several regions have ecological profit while others have not. In general, the present ecological deficit caused by industrial activities was small in 2007. (4) Per unit area carbon footprint 
of industrial space in China was about 0.63 hm2
/hm2
 in 2007, in which that of living & industrial-commercial space was the highest (17.5 hm2
/hm2
). The per unit area carbon footprint of 
different industrial spaces all presented a declining trend from east to west of China. 
Keywords: industrial space; carbon footprint; carbon emission intensity; energy consumption; China 
286 Journal of Geographical Sciences
1 Introduction 
Issues of global warming and greenhouse gas emissions are increasingly becoming one of 
the major technological as well as important social and political challenges. They are closely 
related to energy generation and use (Pierucci, 2008). Anthropogenic carbon emission from 
traditional fossil-fuel energy consumption is one of the main causes of global warming. To 
explore the impact of human activities on global carbon cycle, carbon emission caused by 
economic development and energy consumption has become the major concern and a “hot 
spot” in academic circles (Soytasa et al., 2007; Qi et al., 2004; Zhang, 2006; Liu et al., 2002; 
Zhu et al., 2009). 
1.1 Researches on carbon emissions from industrial activities 
In essence, the impact of human economic and energy activities on regional carbon cycle is 
largely achieved by changing the industrial space pattern. The alteration of industrial space 
structure and the regional differences will change the pattern of human energy consumption, 
and further affect the rate of regional carbon cycle. Therefore, industrial activities and the 
carbon emission effects have also become the concern of scholars at home and abroad. For 
example, Schipper et al. (2001) analyzed the carbon emission intensity of 9 manufacturing 
sectors of 13 IEA countries using factor decomposition method, which explained the main 
reasons for growth in carbon emissions since 1990 and made evaluations combined with the 
targets of Kyoto Protocol; Chang et al. (1998) studied the industrial carbon emission and its 
structural decomposition of Taiwan based on the input-output approach. Casler et al. (1998) 
used model method to analyze the structure of U.S. carbon emissions, which maintained that 
the use of alternative energy was the major factor causing carbon emission decline. Chen et 
al. (2009) analyzed the embodied carbon emissions from final consumption and industrial 
process of all industrial sectors in China based on input-output analysis. Yu et al. (2009) and 
Wei et al. (2009) used input-output analysis to compare the carbon leakage and transfer of 
different industries in the study of carbon emissions embodied in international trade. In addition, some scholars carried out researches on the relationship between different industries 
and carbon emissions (Zhang, 2005; Tan et al., 2008). 
Based on the study of carbon emission, the study on low-carbon economy and its relationship with energy consumption also became a hot topic. Kawase R (2006) used an improved kaya identity to study factor decomposition on carbon emissions, and carried out 
scenario forecast on carbon emission reduction targets of different countries; Shimada K 
(2007) established a future regional scale, low-carbon economic scenario analysis method; 
Zhuang Guiyang (2005, 2007) analyzed the possible paths and potential for low-carbon development in China’s economy. Gomi K (2010) studied carbon emission and the future 
low-carbon economic development of Tokyo City using scenario analysis method. 
The above studies provide important theoretical references to low-carbon economic planning based on industrial carbon emission reduction. However, most of these studies focused 
on the impact of industrial structure on carbon emissions, without considering carbon emission intensity and its discrepancy of different industrial spaces. Industrial activity is always 
associated with a certain space. Therefore, to implement carbon emission of industrial activities on different spaces will be of great importance for analyzing and comparing per 
ZHAO Rongqin et al.: Carbon footprint of different industrial spaces based on energy consumption in China 287 
space carbon emission intensity of different industrial activities, and further taking reasonable measures of industry regulation and space pattern optimization to finally reduce regional carbon emissions. 
1.2 Researches on carbon footprint 
Carbon footprint was put forward based on the concept of ecological footprint; it is the 
measure of the amount of direct or indirect CO2 emissions caused by an activity (or accumulation of a product in life cycle) (Wiedmann et al., 2007). There are two views on the 
comprehension of carbon footprint: one defines it as carbon emission of human activities 
(Wiedmann et al., 2007; BP, 2006; Energetics), that is to measure it with emission amount; 
the other one regards carbon footprint as part of ecological footprint: that is the ecological 
carrying capacity required in absorbing CO2 emission from fossil fuel combustion (Wiedmann et al., 2007; Global Footprint Network), which measures in area. 
As the measurement of impact and pressure of human activities on the environment, carbon footprint has become the new focus in the field of ecology in recent years. Such as 
“Living Planet Report” (World Wildlife Fund, 2008) in calculating ecological footprint, 
carbon footprint as a separate category includes not only the direct carbon emissions caused 
by fossil fuel combustion, but also indirect carbon emissions brought by foreign imports. 
The results showed that the global ecological footprint per capita was 2.7 hm2
, in which 
carbon footprint was 1.41 hm2
, which demonstrated that carbon footprint was an important 
factor causing human ecological impact; Sovacool et al. (2010) carried out an assessment 
and analysis on twelve metropolitan carbon footprints and put forward policy proposals to 
reduce carbon footprint; Kenny et al. (2009) compared and analyzed the performance of six 
carbon footprint models for use in Ireland. Schulz (2010) took Singapore as the case, studied 
the direct and indirect greenhouse gas emission footprint of a small and open economic system, he thought that indirect pressures of urban systems should be included in discussions of 
effective and fair adaptation and mitigation strategies. Some Chinese scholars carried out 
beneficial exploration on carbon footprint studies from the angle of carbon footprint accounting (Huang et al., 2009), carbon footprint per capita and carbon footprint products 
(Guo, 2009), the infection and inductivity of carbon footprint (Lai et al., 2006), etc. Overall, 
carbon footprint research is still in its early days and further development is needed, especially in the field of regional differences in carbon footprint of various human energy activities. 
1.3 The aim and meaning of this paper 
From the above studies, we can see that in order to combine the study on industrial carbon 
emission and carbon footprint, in the study of energy carbon emissions, not only carbon 
emission from industrial activities should be considered, but also the analysis on carbon 
emission intensity of different industrial spaces and its carbon footprint effects are needed. 
From the point of view of industrial spaces, this paper established carbon emission model 
based on energy consumption. Through matching industrial spaces with energy consumption 
items, we studied carbon emission intensity of different industrial spaces and regional differences of carbon footprint. Finally, advices of decreasing industrial carbon footprint and 
optimizing industrial space pattern were put forward. 
288 Journal of Geographical Sciences
2 Data and methods 
2.1 Data sources 
At present the main sources of energy are fossil energy, electricity, biomass, solar, hydraulic, 
wind and nuclear energy, and traditional energy, in which fossil energy is the representative, 
is the main cause of carbon emissions. Thus this paper only calculated the carbon emissions 
from major traditional high-carbon energy sources, including fossil energy and rural biomass 
energy. Industrial energy consumption, land use data, crop yield, output value of farming, 
forestry, animal husbandry and fishery of various provinces, municipalities and autonomous 
regions in China by 2007 were adopted. Among them, energy consumption data are from 
“China Energy Statistical Yearbook”, the land use data, crop yield, sown area, output value 
and other data are from “China Statistical Yearbook”, and the standard coal consumption of 
electricity supply is from CEINET industry database. Due to the lack of relevant data in Tibet Autonomous Region, Taiwan Province, Hong Kong and Macao Special Administrative 
Regions, all data sources and results in this paper did not include these areas. 
2.2 Carbon emission from energy consumption 
By establishing energy carbon emission model to calculate the annual carbon emission from 
major energy consumption in various provinces, municipalities and autonomous regions (Formula 1): 
 () Ct Ch Cb = + ∑ (1) 
where Ct is the total amount of carbon emissions; Ch is the carbon emission from fossil energy consumption; and Cb is the carbon emission from rural biomass energy consumption. 
The method is as follows: 
1 12 1 12
1000 44 1000 16 Ch Qh NCV Cf i ii Mfi
⎛ ⎞ = × × × ×+ × × ⎜ ⎟ ⎝ ⎠ ∑ (2) 
where Ch is the total amount of carbon emission from fossil energy consumption; Qhi is the 
fossil energy consumption type i; NCVi the net calorific value of energy; Cfi is the default 
CO2 emission factor; Mfi the default CH4 emission factors. Given values of NCVi, Cfi and 
Mfi from IPCC are used. 1/1000 is the unit conversion coefficient, 12/44 and 12/16 are the 
conversion coefficients of carbon content in CO2 and CH4 respectively. Cfi = Ai × Bi, Ai is 
the default carbon content; Bi the default carbon oxide factor. 
Cb Qb Db Eb = ×× ∑ i ii (3) 
where Cb is the carbon emission from rural biomass energy consumption; Qbi the energy 
consumption type i (firewood, biogas and straw); Dbi the carbon emission coefficient; the 
average of coal carbon emission coefficient from domestic scholars is adopted here (Table 1); 
Ebi is the standard coal coefficient. 
Table 1 Transfer coefficient of carbon emission (tC/t) 
Item Carbon emission coefficient (tC/t) 
Carbon emission 
coefficient 0.702 0.756 0.726 0.7476 0.7329 0.651 0.703 0.7193837 0.717235 
Source Wang Gang
(2006) 
Wang Gang 
(2006) 
Wang Gang
(2006) 
Xu Guoquan
(2006) 
Tan Dan 
(2008)
Gao 
Shuting
(1994)
Wang 
Xuena 
(2006)
He 
Jienan/ORNL 
(2008;1990) 
This 
paper 
(average) 
ZHAO Rongqin et al.: Carbon footprint of different industrial spaces based on energy consumption in China 289 
2.3 Carbon emission intensity of different industrial spaces 
In order to calculate carbon emission and carbon footprint of different industrial spaces, 
based on energy consumption items of Energy Balance Table and land use classification 
system, we cited the study of Li (2009) as a reference, and on the basis of merger, decomposition and appropriate adjustments, we established the corresponding relationship between 
different industrial spaces and carbon emission items (Table 2). Be noted that: (1) the industrial space here not only means the industry itself, but also refers to the spatial extent of industrial activities sustained by land; (2) carbon emission of different industries were merged 
in order to combine the divided industrial spaces with land use data, and carbon emission per 
space was calculated; (3) living & industrial-commercial space mainly refers to human living and production space or human resident space; (4) given that rural energy use is mainly 
centralized in the rural residential areas, thus its carbon emission was incorporated into living & industrial-commercial space; (5) other sectors in the Energy Balance Table can not be 
easily subdivided further, thus incorporated into other industrial space; (6) agriculture, forestry and animal husbandry are mainly for carbon absorption with little human carbon emission, thus incorporated into agricultural space. Carbon emission intensity of industrial space 
is calculated as follows: 
 Cpi = Cti/Si (4) 
 / Cp Ct S = ∑ i i ∑ (5) 
where Cp is the carbon emission intensity of provincial industrial space; Cpi is the carbon 
emission intensity of various industrial spaces (t/hm2
); i is the different types of industrial 
space; Si is the type i industrial space land area; Cti is the type i carbon emission amount. 
Table 2 The corresponding relationship between industrial spaces and carbon emission items 
Industrial spaces division Land use type (Energy Balance Table) Energy consumption items 
Construction 
Urban built-up land Wholesale and retail, hotels and catering service 
Urban residential consumption 
Rural settlements Rural residential consumption 
Living & industrialcommercial space 
Independent mining land Industry 
Transportation industrial space Transportation land Transport, storage, postal & telecommunications services 
Cultivated land 
Garden land 
Farming 
Wood land Forestry 
Agricultural space 
Grassland Animal husbandry 
Water body Fishery Fishery and water 
conservancy space Water conservancy 
infrastructure Water conservancy 
Farming, forestry, animal 
husbandry, fishery and 
water conservancy 
Unused land 
Other industrial space 
Special use land 
Other 
2.4 Carbon footprint of different industrial spaces 
In this paper, carbon footprint is defined as the productive land (vegetation) area needed in 
290 Journal of Geographical Sciences
absorbing carbon emissions, which means the ecological footprint of carbon emissions. 
Since the energy carbon emission calculation includes the carbon emissions from rural biomass energy, thus here agricultural vegetation was regarded as part of the carbon footprint. 
NEP reflects the carbon fixation capacity of vegetation, that is to say the carbon absorption 
amount of per hectare vegetation per year (Xie et al., 2008). In this paper, NEP indicators 
were adopted to reflect the carbon absorption of different vegetation, and further calculated 
the area of productive land needed in absorbing carbon emissions (carbon footprint). The 
method is as follows: 
f g a
f g a
P p P CF Ct
NEP NEP NEP
⎛ ⎞
=× + + ⎜ ⎟
⎝ ⎠
 (6) 
where CF is the carbon footprint (hm2
) brought by the total amount of carbon emissions (Ct); 
Pf, Pg and Pa are the total carbon absorption proportion of forest, grassland and farmland 
respectively; NEPf, NEPg and NEPa are the NEP of forest, grassland and farmland respectively. Here employed the NEP results of forest and grassland of Xie et al. (2008). The NEP 
of farmland was calculated as follows: 
/ / aS d
i
NEP C S C s = = ∑ (7) 
where i is the crop type i; CS is the total carbon absorption of crop during growth period; S is 
the cultivated land area; Cd is the carbon absorption of certain crop during whole growth 
period; Cd = CaDw = CaYw/H, Ca is the carbon absorption rate; Yw is the economic output; Dw
is the biological yield; H is the economic coefficient. The economic coefficients and carbon 
absorption rates of China’s main crops can be seen in reference (Li, 2000; Zhao et al., 
2007). 
Based on the analysis of total carbon footprint, per unit area carbon footprint of different 
industrial spaces can be obtained by carbon footprint of certain industrial space divided by 
the corresponding industrial space land area. 
3 Results and discussion 
3.1 Results analysis 
(1) Total amount of carbon emission from energy consumption of China in 2007 was 
about 1.65 GtC (1 Gt = 109
 t), in which the carbon emissions from fossil energy and rural 
biomass energy consumption were 1.46 GtC and 0.19GtC respectively and the proportions 
were 89% and 11%. The largest amount of regional carbon emission was in Hebei Province 
(0.14 GtC). The regions in which total carbon emission amount exceeding 100 MtC (1Mt = 
106
 t) were Shandong, Liaoning and Henan provinces, mainly associated with the high energy consumption of these regions; the smallest amount was in Hainan Province, being only 
4.85 MtC. In addition, the carbon emission amount in western China, such as Qinghai and 
Ningxia, was also relatively small (Figure 1). 
There were differences in carbon emission constitution in various regions of China. Overall, regional carbon emission was mainly constituted of carbon emission from fossil energy. 
However, carbon emission from fossil energy occupied a large proportion in eastern China, 
mostly above 90%, while in western China carbon emission from rural biomass energy held 
ZHAO Rongqin et al.: Carbon footprint of different industrial spaces based on energy consumption in China 291 
Figure 1 Carbon emission from energy consumption of different regions 
a relatively large proportion, in which Guangxi and Sichuan even reached 30%. This was 
mainly related to the different energy consumption structure of different regions, for that in 
western China the proportion of rural energy use was relatively high. 
(2) Among the five industrial spaces, the carbon emission of living & industrial-commercial space was the highest, for 1.47 GtC, which accounted for nearly 90% of the total carbon 
emissions, followed by that of transportation industrial space accounting for 7.3%. Carbon 
emission amount of other types of industry was relatively small (Table 3). It demonstrated 
that energy consumption was mainly concentrated in the fields of production, living and 
transportation. 
There were significant regional differences in the constitution of carbon emission of industrial spaces. In general, the carbon emissions of most regions were mainly constituted of 
carbon emission of living, production and transportation industrial space. The carbon emission proportion of living & industrial-commercial space in central and western China was 
higher than that in some developed provinces of eastern China. For instance, the proportions 
of Henan, Anhui, Hebei, Jiangxi and Shanxi provinces were all more than 93%, and that of 
Hebei was even as high as 95.7%; the proportions of Beijing and Shanghai were relatively 
low, which were 75.1% and 69.4% respectively. It indicated that the energy consumption of 
production, living and industry and mining was higher in central and western China than that 
in eastern China. The carbon emission proportion of transportation industrial space in the 
developed Beijing and Shanghai was high, 24.6% for Shanghai, while that in central and 
western China was low, only 2.8% for Hebei. This demonstrated that in the developed, 
transportation and population concentrated areas, due to the development and concentration 
of transportation industries, with limited industrial space, the carbon emission intensity was 
relatively high. 
Table 3 Carbon emission of different industrial spaces 
Carbon emission 
Industrial space 
Total (106
 t) % 
Land area 
(106
 hm2
) 
Carbon emission 
intensity of industrial 
space (t/hm2
) 
Agricultural space 30.74 1.87 505.46 0.06 
Living & industrialcommercial space 1467.54 89.12 26.61 55.16 
Transportation industrial space 120.19 7.30 2.42 49.65 
Fishery and water 
conservancy space 
3.18 0.19 36.80 0.09 
Other industrial space 25.11 1.52 259.20 0.10 
Total 1646.77 100 830.49 1.98 
292 Journal of Geographical Sciences
(3) Carbon emission intensity of industrial spaces of China in 2007 was 1.98 t/hm2
, in 
which, carbon emission intensity of living & industrial-commercial space and transportation 
industrial space were 55.16 t/hm2
 and 49.65 t/hm2
 respectively. The carbon emission intensity of other three types of industrial space was lower, with that of agricultural space only 
0.06 t/hm2
 (Table 3). There were large regional differences in carbon emission intensity of 
industrial spaces. Generally the carbon emission intensity of central and eastern China was 
significantly higher than that of the western region. The highest was in Shanghai for 49.68 
t/hm2
, the lowest in Qinghai for 0.083 t/hm2
, a difference of nearly 600 times (Figure 2). In 
addition, the carbon emission intensity of living & industrial-commercial space, transportation industrial space, other industrial space and agricultural space of Shanghai were 128.01 
t/hm2
, 521.79 t/hm2
, 41.43 t/hm2
 and 0.95 t/hm2
 respectively, all of which were the highest 
of the country. It demonstrated that Shanghai had high carbon emissions while the land resources of various types of space were scarce and intense, resulting in high carbon emission 
intensity and carbon density. Furthermore, various types of industrial spaces of Beijing, 
Tianjin, Jiangsu and Zhejiang also had high carbon emission intensity. 
Figure 2 Carbon emission intensity of industrial spaces in different regions 
(4) Carbon footprint caused by industrial activities of China in 2007 was 522.34×106
 hm2
, 
while the area of productive land was only 493.65×106
 hm2
, which brought about ecological 
deficit of 28.69×106
 hm2
 (Table 4), equivalent to 3.46% of the country’s total land area. It 
meant that the productive land area was not sufficient to compensate carbon footprint of industrial spaces, and the compensating rate was 94.5%. The primary reason was that in 2007 
China’s carbon emission from energy consumption evidently exceeded the carbon absorption of productive land. The results also showed that: based on the fact that the calculation in 
this paper included the carbon absorption of farmland, although there was carbon deficit of 
industrial activities in China, the deficit was not large, thus generally the most part of annual 
carbon emission from energy consumption of industrial activities can be absorbed by the 
country’s productive land. 
 As to various regions, the carbon footprint of Hebei Province was the largest for 
44.71×106
 hm2
, the smallest was that of Hainan Province, with only 1.54×106
 hm2 (Figure 3). 
Regional difference in the carbon footprint was basically in accordance with that of carbon 
emission from energy consumption (Figure 1). Moreover, due to the large differences in 
productive land area of various regions, the ecological deficit varied significantly. The ecological deficit of Hebei was the highest, which reached 34.31×106
 hm2
. Shandong, Liaoning, 
Jiangsu, Henan and Guangdong provinces also had high ecological deficit. Some regions 
ZHAO Rongqin et al.: Carbon footprint of different industrial spaces based on energy consumption in China 293 
Table 4 Main results of different industrial spaces 
Industrial space Carbon footprint 
(106
 hm2
) 
Productive land 
area (106
 hm2
)
Ecological 
deficit (106 hm2
)
Land area 
(106
 hm2
) 
Per unit area carbon 
footprint (hm2
/hm2
) 
Agricultural space 9.75 – – 505.46 0.02 
Living & industrialcommercial space 465.49 – – 26.61 17.50 
Transportation industrial space 38.12 – – 2.42 15.75 
Fishery and water 
conservancy space 
1.01 – – 36.80 0.03 
Other industrial space 7.96 – – 259.20 0.03 
Total 522.34 493.65 28.69 830.49 0.63 
Figure 3 Carbon footprint and ecological deficit of industrial activity in different regions 
which possessed large area of productive land had ecological profit (the ecological deficit is 
negative), such as Inner Mongolia, Heilongjiang, Qinghai, Xinjiang, Sichuan, Gansu and 
Yunnan provinces, among which Inner Mongolia had the highest ecological profit for 
74.34×106
 hm2
 (Figure 3). The ecological profit was mainly due to the high vegetation coverage of those regions. Therefore, in the provincial level, some regions with low energy 
consumption and high vegetation coverage can fully compensate for their own carbon emission from energy consumption. 
(5) Per unit area carbon footprint of industrial space in China was 0.63 hm2
/hm2
 in 2007. 
Different industrial spaces had large differences in per unit area carbon footprint, in which 
living & industrial-commercial space was the highest (17.5 hm2
/hm2
), followed by transportation industrial space (15.75 hm2
/hm2
), agriculture space the least with only 0.02 hm2
/hm2
(Table 4). Per unit area carbon footprint of different industrial spaces of various provinces 
and regions varied significantly. Per unit area carbon footprint of industrial space of various 
provinces and regions presented a declining trend from central and eastern China to the 
western part (Figure 4f). Per unit area carbon footprint of Shanghai was the largest, up to 
15.76 hm2
/hm2
, followed by Tianjin and Beijing, then the North China and the eastern 
coastal areas with generally above 1 hm2
/hm2
, again followed by South China. Per unit area 
carbon footprint of the northeastern and western regions was relatively low, of which the 
lowest was in Qinghai Province with only 0.03 hm2
/hm2
 (Table 5). In addition, the research 
found that in the 30 provincial administrative units studied in this paper, there were 14 
provinces with per unit area carbon footprint greater than 1 hm2
/hm2
, and 16 provinces with 
per unit area carbon footprint less than 1 hm2
/hm2
. The latter ones included South China, 
northeast and southwest regions with better ecological environment, and the underdeveloped 
western regions, indicating that there were about half of the provinces in China in which 
294 Journal of Geographical Sciences
Table 5 Sorting of per unit area carbon footprint of different industrial spaces in different regions (hm2
/hm2
) 
Rank Region 
Agricultural 
space
Region 
Living & 
industrial-com
mercial 
space
Region
Transportation 
industrial 
space 
Region
Fishery 
and water 
conservancy 
space
Region
Other 
industrial 
space 
Region 
Industrial 
space of 
various 
regions 
 China 0.02 China 17.50 China 15.75 China 0.03 China 0.03 China 0.63 
1 Shanghai 0.30 Shanghai 40.60 Shanghai 165.51 Fujian 0.29 Shanghai 13.14 Shanghai 15.76 
2 Beijing 0.17 Liaoning 31.12 Beijing 41.43 Zhejiang 0.14 Beijing 2.27 Beijing 6.46 
3 Tianjin 0.13 Beijing 28.94 Guangdong 31.21 Chongqing 0.14 Tianjin 2.15 Tianjin 6.44 
4 Chongqing 0.11 Hebei 27.89 Tianjin 28.81 Shanghai 0.10 Shandong 0.74 Jiangsu 2.83 
5 Shandong 0.11 Shanxi 26.57 Liaoning 27.75 Beijing 0.08 Zhejiang 0.43 Shandong 2.76 
6 Jiangsu 0.07 Tianjin 24.79 Shandong 22.46 Shandong 0.08 Jilin 0.25 Liaoning 2.66 
7 Zhejiang 0.05 Guizhou 23.65 Hubei 21.95 Hubei 0.07 Liaoning 0.20 Hebei 2.37 
8 Guizhou 0.05 Yunnan 20.77 Hainan 21.66 Guizhou 0.06 Fujian 0.20 Henan 1.93 
9 Hubei 0.05 Guangxi 20.27 Zhejiang 18.29 Tianjin 0.06 Hebei 0.11 Zhejiang 1.56 
10 Hunan 0.05 Fujian 20.01 Chongqing 16.32 Liaoning 0.06 Guizhou 0.08 Guangdong 1.51 
11 Shanxi 0.05 Shandong 18.29 Jiangsu 14.27 Jiangsu 0.05 Hainan 0.06 Shanxi 1.38 
12 Henan 0.04 Hubei 18.21 Xinjiang 13.90 Guangdong 0.05 Guangdong 0.06 Hubei 1.13 
13 Liaoning 0.04 Jiangxi 18.17 Ningxia 13.66 Hainan 0.04 Ningxia 0.04 Anhui 1.12 
14 Fujian 0.04 Zhejiang 17.75 Shaanxi 13.28 Yunnan 0.03 Hubei 0.04 Chongqing 1.02 
15 Jilin 0.03 Jiangsu 17.65 Hunan 12.62 Hunan 0.03 Inner 
Mongolia 0.04 Hunan 0.98 
16 Guangdong 0.02 Hunan 17.40 Guangxi 12.15 Anhui 0.03 Jiangsu 0.03 Fujian 0.93 
17 Anhui 0.02 Henan 16.14 Yunnan 11.93 Jiangxi 0.02 Jiangxi 0.02 Jilin 0.79 
18 Hainan 0.02 Guangdong 15.84 Shanxi 11.45 Guangxi 0.01 Guangxi 0.02 Jiangxi 0.78 
19 Yunnan 0.02 Jilin 15.75 Jilin 11.19 Sichuan 0.01 Anhui 0.02 Guizhou 0.70 
20 Heilongjiang 0.02 Ningxia 15.51 Fujian 10.93 Henan 0.01 Sichuan 0.02 Guangxi 0.66 
21 Jiangxi 0.02 Chongqing 14.66 Hebei 10.52 Shanxi 0.00 Shanxi 0.02 Ningxia 0.61 
22 Hebei 0.011 Shaanxi 13.46 Sichuan 10.42 Jilin 0.00 Heilongjiang 0.02 Shaanxi 0.51 
23 Sichuan 0.010 Sichuan 13.36 Inner 
Mongolia 10.22 Hebei 0.00 Henan 0.02 Hainan 0.44 
24 Shaanxi 0.009 Inner Mongolia 13.32 Henan 9.75 Ningxia 0.003 Shaanxi 0.011 Sichuan 0.41 
25 Guangxi 0.008 Heilongjiang 
11.04 Guizhou 9.55 Heilongjiang 
0.002 Chongqi
ng 
0.007 Yunnan 0.38 
26 Gansu 0.007 Anhui 11.02 Jiangxi 8.66 Shaanxi 0.002 Qinghai 0.005 Heilongjiang 0.32 
27 Xinjiang 0.006 Xinjiang 8.92 Heilongjiang 8.29 Xinjiang 0.002 Yunnan 0.005 Gansu 0.19 
28 Ningxia 0.006 Gansu 7.91 Anhui 7.25 Inner 
Mongolia 0.001 Hunan 0.005 Inner 
Mongolia 0.17 
29 Inner 
Mongolia 0.004 Qinghai 6.55 Gansu 6.98 Gansu 0.0002 Gansu 0.003 Xinjiang 0.06 
30 Qinghai 0.000 Hainan 5.16 Qinghai 4.28 Qinghai 0.000 Xinjiang 0.002 Qinghai 0.03 
per unit area carbon footprint of industrial space was less than the area of the region itself. 
There were also large regional differences in per unit area carbon footprint of different 
industrial spaces. Generally per unit area carbon footprint of different industrial spaces all 
presented a declining trend from east to west of China (Figures 4a–4e). The largest per unit 
ZHAO Rongqin et al.: Carbon footprint of different industrial spaces based on energy consumption in China 295 
(a) Carbon footprint of agricultural space (b) Carbon footprint of living & industrial-commercial space 
(c) Carbon footprint of transportation industrial space (d) Carbon footprint of fishery and water conservancy space 
(e) Carbon footprint of other industrial space (f) Carbon footprint of industrial space of various regions 
Figure 4 Distribution of per unit area carbon footprint of different industrial spaces in different regions (hm2
/hm2
) 
area carbon footprint of fishery and water conservancy space was that of Fujian Province 
(0.29 hm2
/hm2
), and the largest per unit area carbon footprint of other types of industrial 
space was all in Shanghai, in which that of living & industrial-commercial space, transportation industrial space and other industrial space were 40.6 hm2
/hm2
, 165.51 hm2
/hm2
 and 
296 Journal of Geographical Sciences
13.14 hm2
/hm2
 respectively. The above values of Shanghai were not only far ahead of the 
provinces and regions of the country, but also far greater than the national average of various 
industrial spaces (Table 5). Moreover, in the types of living & industrial-commercial space, 
transportation industrial space and other industrial space, Beijing, Tianjin and the eastern 
developed areas also had high carbon footprint intensity. In contrast, in Qinghai, Xinjiang, 
Inner Mongolia and other western regions and Hainan Province, per unit area carbon footprint of various industrial spaces were all relatively low. Specific results were in Table 5. 
The results indicated that, on the one hand the economically developed eastern regions 
had high energy consumption, resulting in high carbon emissions; on the other hand the 
eastern regions, especially municipalities with land shortage, due to the industrial space 
concentration, the carbon emission intensity of various industrial spaces was high, which led 
to high carbon footprint. Instead, due to the larger land area and less energy consumption, 
the carbon footprint intensity of various industrial spaces of the western regions was lower. 
For instance, the lowest of living & industrial-commercial space and transportation industrial space were in Hainan (5.16 hm2
/hm2
) and Qinghai (4.28 hm2
/hm2
) respectively, which 
were 1/8 and 1/39 of Shanghai (Table 5). The carbon footprint of agriculture space and fishery and water conservancy space in the western regions was even lower. For example in 
Qinghai Province, since there was little carbon emission from energy consumption of these 
two types of land, the carbon footprint was almost negligible. 
3.2 Discussion 
3.2.1 About carbon emission 
The carbon emission result of this paper was slightly higher than that of other Chinese 
scholars in recent years (Table 6). There are two main reasons: First, the carbon emission 
calculation of this paper included carbon emission from fossil energy and rural biomass energy consumption; the total amount of carbon emission would be 1.46 GtC if we only included that from fossil energy. Second, the calculation of this paper was based on the data of 
the year 2007, thus it is reasonable that the results had a certain degree of growth compared 
with those of other researches in 2003–2005 (Table 6). 
Compared with the results of abroad, the carbon emission of 2007 in China in this paper 
(1.647 GtC) was relatively low. For example, the carbon emission of China collected by 
CDIAC was 1.783 GtC in 2007. 
Table 6 Comparison of results with other authors 
Author Carbon emission (GtC) Year Reference 
Wei Yiming 1.37 2004 Wei et al., 2008 
Xiao Lian 1.127 2003 Xiao, 2008 
Liu Hongguang 1.13 2004 Liu et al., 2009 
Xu Guoquan 1.28 2004 Xu et al., 2006 
Liu Qiang 1.505 2005 Liu et al., 2008 
Wei Baoren 1.282 2005 Wei, 2007 
Chen Qingtai 1.3–2.0 2020 Chen, 2004 
CDIAC 1.783 2007 CDIAC, 2010 
This paper 1.647 2007 
ZHAO Rongqin et al.: Carbon footprint of different industrial spaces based on energy consumption in China 297 
3.2.2 About carbon footprint 
It should be noted that the carbon emission of industrial space of this article placed more 
weight on the carbon intensity analysis of industrial activities, so as to understand the spatial 
carbon emission density caused by different industrial activities. Since the land only plays 
the role of space sustaining, rather than the source of carbon emission, thus carbon emission 
does not mean the emission from the land itself, but the carbon emission from industrial activities sustained by land. 
As to different regions, the large land area of certain industrial space would probably 
make the result of per unit area carbon footprint of the corresponding industrial space a little 
too small. For instance, per unit area carbon footprint of Anhui Province was 1.12 hm2
/hm2
, 
ranking 13th in China, which was at high level; however, due to the relatively large area of 
living & industrial-commercial space and transportation industrial space, per unit area carbon footprint of the two types of space ranked 26th and 28th in the country. The overall 
carbon footprint of Xinjiang was low, yet because of the small area of transportation industrial space, per unit area carbon footprint of transportation industrial space in Xinjiang was 
relatively high, ranking 12th in the country (Table 5). The results indicated that based on the 
calculation method of carbon footprint of industrial space in this paper, the carbon footprint 
of regional different industries was affected by the structure of regional industrial land. 
3.3 Policy recommendations 
In order to reduce regional carbon emission intensity and carbon footprint, the following 
measures can be considered: (1) the use of fossil energy is the primary reason causing carbon emission. Therefore, to innovate on traditional energy structure and use clean energy, is 
the main way to reduce regional per unit area carbon emission and carbon footprint. (2) The 
central and western regions should minimize the energy consumption of living and industry 
and mining, in particular to reduce the use of rural biomass energy, so as to lower the carbon 
emission intensity of living & industrial-commercial space; the eastern regions should adopt 
clean energy in the transportation industry as much as possible, in order to reduce the carbon 
pollution of transportation sector. (3) To strengthen the ecological management and protection of the regions with ecological profit, and enhance the carbon fixation efficiency of productive land, which can effectively reduce regional carbon emission level and intensity. (4) 
The key to reduce carbon emission intensity and carbon footprint is to adjust industrial space 
pattern and regulate the industrial activities (such as construction industry, transportation 
industry, etc.) of high carbon footprint. (5) To consider carbon footprint effect in the industrial space arrangement and planning, introduce the concept of carbon emission reduction, 
on the one hand reduce carbon pollution of the high-carbon-emission spaces through industrial regulation, on the other hand minimize carbon emission intensity of per industrial space 
through improving energy efficiency and energy structure. 
4 Conclusions and perspectives 
Based on the energy consumption and land use data of various provinces, municipalities and 
autonomous regions of China in 2007, this paper carried out the accounting of carbon emission from fossil energy and rural biomass energy of various provinces and regions by estab-
298 Journal of Geographical Sciences
lishing energy carbon emission and carbon footprint model; through matching industrial 
space with energy consumption items, the carbon emission intensity and carbon footprint of 
different industrial spaces were compared and analyzed. 
The main disadvantages and error sources are: (1) the division of industrial spaces was 
based on energy carbon emission items and land classification system. Since the correspondence between the data should be considered, some of the industrial spaces were not subdivided. Thus there was inevitably some error in the corresponding relationship between industrial spaces and carbon emission items. (2) As to different regions, there might be little 
differences in the total amount of carbon emission; however, the large area of certain industrial space might make the per unit area carbon footprint result a little too small, and vice 
versa. In addition, due to the difficulty in combining time-series data of land and energy at 
the provincial level, this paper only studied the regional difference in carbon footprint from 
energy consumption of different industrial spaces, the variation characteristics of carbon 
footprint of industrial space in various provinces and regions on temporal dimension were 
not analyzed. 
Based on the above deficiencies, the following two aspects should be strengthened in the 
future research: (1) different industrial spaces should be further divided, in order to precisely 
calculate the carbon emission of different land use types and industrial spaces, to provide 
theory support for low-carbon economy planning based on optimizing industrial space pattern; (2) to further integrate the research of carbon emission of industrial activities and land 
use. On the one hand study the variation law of carbon emission of industrial activities sustained by land, on the other hand study the carbon flux and carbon metabolism of different 
land use types and the carbon emission effect of land use type conversion, so as to establish 
comprehensive carbon cycle model which includes both natural carbon emission and 
socio-economic carbon emission on the regional scale. 
Acknowledgements 
This paper obtained valuable revising comments and suggestions from reviewers. Dr. Zhang 
Xingyu and Dr. Jiao Shixing gave inspiring comments on paper ideas and calculation. Sun 
Zhenru helped to draw the illustrations. We would like to express our gratitude for their 
supports. 
References 
BP, 2007. What on earth is a carbon footprint? http://www.bp.com/liveassets/bp_internet/globalbp/STAGING/ 
global_assets/downloads/A/ABP_ADV_what_on_earth_is_a_carbon_footprint.pdf. 
Casler S D, Rose A, 1998. Carbon dioxide emissions in the U.S. economy: A structural decomposition analysis. 
Environmental and Resource Economics, 11(3/4): 349–363. 
Chang, Y F, Lin S J, 1998. Structural decomposition of industrial CO2 emission in Taiwan: An input–output approach. Energy Policy, 26(1): 5–12. 
Chen Hongmin, 2009. Analysis on embodied CO2 emissions including industrial process emissions. China Population Resources and Environment, 19(3): 25–30. (in Chinese) 
Chen Qingtai, 2004. China National Energy Development Strategy and Policy Analysis. Beijing: Economic Science Press, 592. (in Chinese) 
Energetics, 2007. The Reality of Carbon Neutrality. www.energetics.com.au/file?node_id=21228. 
ZHAO Rongqin et al.: Carbon footprint of different industrial spaces based on energy consumption in China 299 
Gao Shuting, 1994. Forecast method and countermeasures for greenhouse gases emission in China. Research of 
Environmental Sciences, 7(6): 56–59. (in Chinese) 
Global Footprint Network. Ecological Footprint Glossary. http://www.footprintnetwork.org/gfn_sub.php?content=glossary. 
Gomi K et al., 2010. A low-carbon scenario creation method for a local-scale economy and its application in 
Kyoto city. Energy Policy, Energy Policy, 38 (9): 4783–4796. 
Guo Yungong, 2009. The analysis on calculation and characteristics of greenhouse gas emission in mega-cities 
[D]. Shanghai: East China Normal University, 19–20. (in Chinese) 
He Jienan, Kang Wenxing, 2008. Estimation of carbon emissions from fossil fuel and industrial production from 
2000 to 2005 in Hunan Province. Journal of Central South University of Forestry & Technology, 28(5): 52–58. 
(in Chinese) 
Huang Xianjin, Ge Yang, Ye Tanglin et al., 2009. Circular Economics. Nanjing: Southeast University Press, 
147–159. (in Chinese) 
Kawase R, Matsuoka Y, Fujino J, 2006. Decomposition analysis of CO2 emission in long-term climate stabilization scenarios. Energy Policy, 34: 2113–2122. 
Kenny T, Gray N F, 2009. Comparative performance of six carbon footprint models for use in Ireland. Environmental Impact Assessment Review, (29): 1–6. 
Lai Li, Huang Xianjin, Liu Weiliang, 2006. Adjustment for regional ecological footprint based on input-output 
technique: A case study of Jiangsu Province in 2002. Acta Ecologica Sinica, 26(4): 1285–1292. (in Chinese)
Li Kerang, 2000. Land Use Change, Net Emission of Greenhouse Gases and the Carbon Cycle in Terrestrial 
Ecosystems. Beijing: China Meteorological Press, 260. (in Chinese) 
Li Pu, 2009. Research of optimized the structure of construction land in low-carbon scenario: A case study in 
Jiangsu province [D]. Nanjing: Nanjing University, 27. (in Chinese) 
Liu Hongguang, Liu Weidong, 2009. Decomposition of energy-induced CO2 emissions in industry of China. 
Progress in Geography, 28(2): 285–292. (in Chinese) 
Liu Hui, Cheng Shengkui, Zhang Lei, 2002. The international latest research of the impacts of human activities on 
carbon emissions. Progress in Geography, 21(5): 420–429. (in Chinese) 
Liu Qiang, Zhuang Xin, Jiang Kejun et al., 2008. Energy and carbon embodied in main exporting goods of China. 
China Industrial Economics, (8): 46–55. (in Chinese) 
ORNL, 1990. Estimate of CO2 emission from fossil fuel burning and cement manufacturing. ORNL/CDIAC-25. 
Carbon Dioxide Information Analysis Center, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, Tennessee, USA. 
Pierucci S, 2009. PRES 2007: Carbon footprint and emission minimisation, integration and management of energy sources, industrial application and case studies. Energy, 33: 1477–1479. 
Qi Yuchun, Dong Yunshe, 2004. Emission of greenhouse gases from energy field and mitigation countermeasures 
in China. Scientia Geographica Sinica, 24(5): 528–534. (in Chinese) 
Schipper L, Murtishaw S, Khrushch M et al., 2001. Carbon emissions from manufacturing energy use in 13 IEA 
countries: Long-term trends through 1995. Energy Policy, 29(9): 667–688. 
Shimada K, Tanaka Y, Gomi K et al., 2007. Developing a long-term local society design methodology towards a 
low-carbon economy: An application to Shiga Prefecture in Japan. Energy Policy, 35 (6): 4688–4703. 
Sovacool B K, Brown M A, 2010. Twelve metropolitan carbon footprints: A preliminary comparative global assessment. Energy Policy, 38(9): 4856–4869. 
Soytasa U, Sari R, Ewing B T, 2007. Energy consumption, income, and carbon emissions in the United States. 
Ecological Economics, 62(3/4): 482–489. 
Tan Dan, Huang Xianjin, 2008. Correlation analysis and comparison of the economic development and carbon 
emissions in the eastern, central and western parts of China. China Population Resources and Environment, 
18(3): 54–57. (in Chinese) 
Tan Dan, Huang Xianjin, Hu Chuzhi, 2008. Analysis of the relationship between industrial upgrading and carbon 
emission in China. Sichuan Environment, 27(2): 74–78. (in Chinese) 
United Nations Statistics Division. Millennium Development Goals indicators: Carbon dioxide emissions (CO2), 
300 Journal of Geographical Sciences
thousand metric tons of CO2 (collected by CDIAC), http://mdgs.un.org/unsd/mdg/SeriesDetail.aspx?srid= 
749&crid= 
Wang Gang, Feng Xiao, 2006. CO2 emission reduction through energy integration. Chemical Industry and Engineering Progress, 25(12): 1467–1470. (in Chinese) 
Wang Xuena, 2006. Study on estimation method of carbon emission to energy carbon sources in China [D]. Beijing: Beijing Forestry University, 28. (in Chinese) 
Wei Baoren, 2007. Energy Demand and Scenario Analysis of CO2 Emission in China. Beijing: China Environmental Science Press, 75. (in Chinese) 
Wei Benyong, Fang Xiuqi, Wang Yuan, 2009. Estimation of carbon emissions embodied in international trade for 
China: An input-output analysis. Journal of Beijing Normal University (Natural Science), 45(4): 413–419. (in 
Chinese) 
Wei Yiming, Liu Lancui, Fan Ying et al., 2008. China Energy Report (2008): CO2 Emissions Research. Beijing: 
Science Press, 31. (in Chinese) 
Wiedmann T, Minx J, 2007. A definition of carbon footprint. http://www.censa.org.uk/docs/ISA-UK_Report_ 
07-01_carbon_footprint.pdf 
World Wildlife Fund, 2008. Living planet report 2008. www.panda.org 
Xiao Lian, 2008. Sino-U.S. Energy Cooperation: Improve Energy Security and Protect Environment. Beijing: 
World Affairs Press, 133. (in Chinese) 
Xie Hongyu, Chen Xiansheng, Lin Kairong, 2008. The ecological footprint analysis of fossil energy and electricity. Acta Ecologica Sinica, 28(4): 1729–1735. (in Chinese) 
Xu Guoquan, Liu Zeyuan, Jiang Zhaohua, 2006. Decomposition model and empirical study of carbon emissions 
for China, 1995–2004. China Population, Resources and Environment, 16 (6): 158–161. (in Chinese) 
Yu Huichao, Wang Limao, 2009.Research on the carbon emission transfer by Sino-US merchandise trade. Journal 
of Natural Resources, 24(10): 1837–1846. (in Chinese) 
Zhang Deying, 2005. Progress in estimation method of carbon emission from industrial sector of China [D]. Beijing: Beijing Forestry University, 18–30. (in Chinese) 
Zhang Lei, 2006. A changing pattern of regional CO2 emissions in China. Geographical Research, 25(1): 1–9. (in 
Chinese) 
Zhao Rongqin, Qin Mingzhou, 2007. Temporo-spatial variation of partial carbon source/sink of farmland ecosystem in coastal China. Journal of Ecology and Rural Environment, 23(2): 1–6, 11. (in Chinese) 
Zhu Yongbin, Wang Zheng, Pang Li et al., 2009. Simulation on China’s economy and prediction on energy consumption and carbon emission under optimal growth path. Acta Geographica Sinica, 64(8): 935–944. (in Chinese) 
Zhuang Guiyang, 2005. Path and potential analysis on low-carbon development of China’s economy. Studies in 
International Technology and Economy, 8(3): 8–12. (in Chinese) 
Zhuang Guiyang, 2007. Low-carbon Economy: The Development Path for China under Climate Change Context. 
Beijing: China Meteorological Press, 1–67. (in Chinese) 
1
第十章：资源利用中的环境问题
本章要求：
 
 （1）认知资源开发利用的负外部性即
引致的环境问题；
 （2）基于低碳发展了解碳排放核算过
程及分析思路；
 （3）基于环境容量分析资源利用的主
要策略。
2
主要内容
第一节 资源利用的外部性及测算
第二节 碳排放核算及分析
第三节 环境伦理、环境容量与资源利用
第四节 资源环境协调策略
3
 外部性内涵及特征
 外部性的测算案例
第一节 资源利用的外部性及测算
4
 外部性：某个人或实体（接受主体）的效
用被另外一个人或实体影响（产生主体）
的部分。
 外部性分类：若是另外一个人的活动就对
这个人的效用产生积极影响，则为正外部
性；否则为负外部性。
第一节 资源利用的外部性及测算
一、外部性内涵及特征：外部性及其类型
5
 产生主体与接受主体的相互作用；
 单向外部性为主，但也存在交互的外部性
 产权界定不清是外部性的根源，张五常认
为更加完善的合约是积极的解决方式 
第一节 资源利用的外部性及测算
一、外部性内涵及特征：外部性特点
6
 资源利用外部性：由于资源利用引致的外
部性经济或不经济；
 资源产权界定不清是主要原因；
 资源外部性识别的信息成本高，负外部性
影响具有潜伏性和长期性。
第一节 资源利用的外部性及测算
一、外部性内涵及特征：资源利用外部性
7
水
泥
价
格
水泥产量
边际社会成本
P*
P
边际私人成本
Q* Q
负外部性：
 征收税收；明晰产
权（资源产权、环境
产权），实现产权成
本与收益聚焦
正外部性：
 生态补偿/补贴；
第一节 资源利用的外部性及测算
8
环境焦点
 太湖流域素以鱼米之乡著称，一段时期
流域水环境每况愈下，水安全问题成为公
众焦点。
第一节 资源利用的外部性及测算
二、实例分析—以太湖为例
9
 总面积约131km2，容积 
约1.22亿m
3。底部平坦，年 
平均水深只有1m左右，换水 
周期约为10d。 
 典型的草型湖泊，底质肥 
沃，水草茂盛。 
 太湖的主要出水通道，具 
有蓄水、排洪和供水等重要功 
能，是苏州、上海及浙东地区 
的主要水源。
生态功能
第一节 资源利用的外部性及测算
10
过分扩张的网围面积
令人忧心的环境胁迫
东太湖网围
养殖发展历
程
第一节 资源利用的外部性及测算
图片资料来源：陈亚芬（中科院南京地理与湖泊研究所），太湖网围养殖发11
展现状及其整治对策。
第一节 资源利用的外部性及测算
12
东太湖网围养殖发展历程
 时期一：20世纪70年代早期，东太湖的渔业生产还是
单一的捕捞渔业； 
 时期二：到20世纪70年代后期，开始逐步出现围垦养
殖渔业，湖内水草被大量收割作为草食性鱼类饲料。 
 时期三：由于水文动力条件出色，湖浅、水清、风浪
和水位变幅小，东太湖网围养殖从1984年开始兴起，到
1993年网围已遍及沿岸带。 
 时期四：20世纪90年代中后期，网围养殖迅猛发展，
实际网围面积占到湖区面积80％以上。 
 时期五：2000年以后受国家太湖水污染防治“十五”
计划指标控制，网围规模开始逐年减少。 
第一节 资源利用的外部性及测算
13
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000
12000
14000
1984
1985
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
网围面积 湖泊面积 网围养蟹面积
 （1）20世纪80年代中期至90年代初期，养殖面积稳步、
持续增加。20世纪90年代中期至末期养殖面积快速增长，
达到顶峰； 
 （2）从养殖结构来看，20世纪80年代多利用湖区水
草资源进行网围单养草食性鱼类，90年代起大量转为投
饵单养河蟹，目前养蟹面积和产值均占80％以上。 
 （3）2000年以来尤其是2003年以来有所下降，但没
有达到“十五”规划的1500公顷（其中1/3轮休，实际养
殖面积1000公顷）的要求。 
第一节 资源利用的外部性及测算
1984-2005年网围面积折线图 
14
负面影响多方面
环境成本很显著
网围养殖的
生态环境成
本测算
第一节 资源利用的外部性及测算
15
 在网围规模和强度逐步增大，产值效益不断提高的同时，东太湖的生态环
境问题也日益凸现。
 网围整体养殖容量过大，网围设置密度过大，投饵强度过高，养殖结构不
科学，水生植物利用不合理等给湖区的水质、沉积物、水生生物、沼泽化产生
诸多负面影响。
第一节 资源利用的外部性及测算
16
网围养殖的生态环境成本分类账户表
帐户分
类
生态环境成本类型 评估方法
资源耗
减费用
L1
 
水资源（数量型、质
量型）的耗减
河湖水资源供给的生态服务价值/ 
饮用水污染的影响消除成本 
L2
 
特色渔业资源和天然
捕捞业的损失 原天然捕捞的最大可持续产量
环境受
损费用
L3
 景观破碎化 旅游资源的消费者偏好评估/ 
河湖科教旅游生态服务价值 
L4
 
湖区蓄水、泄洪能力
下降
蓄水泄洪的风险成本/ 
水文调节的生态服务价值 
L5
 
水体富营养化，水质
自净能力减弱 水体自净功能的生态服务价值
L6
 饵料沉积，底质污染 底泥的清除成本
第一节 资源利用的外部性及测算
网围养殖的生态环境成本测算
17
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
7000
1984
1985
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
东太湖网围养殖的生态环境成本
 东太湖网围养殖的生态环 
境成本变化特征： 
 一是1993年前为微弱影
响期，养殖规模小，水草利用
率高，生态环境成本低；
 二是1993-97为快速转
变期，网围规模迅猛扩张，养
蟹为主，生态环境成本快速攀
升；
 三是1997年后为高影响期，
遍布网围，环境胁迫效应
显著，生态环境成本居高不
下 。 
第一节 资源利用的外部性及测算
18
 2003年东太湖网围养殖的环境成本约为6022万元，
占网围养殖总产值的26.2％ 。
 从成本结构来看，东太湖水资源供给成本增加、水
体自净能力下降和天然渔业资源损失三项最为显著，占
了全部成本的83％。
 特别是水资源供给损失逐步成为最敏感的生态环境
成本因素，因为东太湖是上海、苏州等地的重要水源地，
 2003年以来上海从东太湖引水占全市供水量近半。
第一节 资源利用的外部性及测算
19
制度需创新
管理待加强 对策与建议
第一节 资源利用的外部性及测算
20
 通过明晰的产权界定来刺激所有权者和使用权者的可持续利用。
 一是建立水权制度，尤其是完善水面利用权的产权界定，短期的产权
可能更有效；
 二是核定养殖许可证。根据湖区生态容量，核定网围养殖许可证数量。
从环境承载力角度看，东太湖的养殖区面积应控制在10～17km2之间；
 三是采取市场招标、拍卖方式，分配许可证。
一、完善网围养殖的产权制度安排
 东太湖是上海、苏州及浙东的重要饮用水源地，其水资源供给风险可
能带来的社会经济损失是难以估量的。上述水资源供给服务的受益区均
为社会经济发达区，有条件也有必要对东太湖所在乡镇及养殖农户进行
积极的生态付费，鼓励其减少网围规模、降低投饵强度和强化水生植物
的收取利用，并促使养殖户“上岸”。
二、积极开拓养殖区生态补偿机制
第一节 资源利用的外部性及测算
21
三、强化网围养殖的规划先导效应
 会同环保、渔业、水利、航道、国土等部门，制定湖泊水面利用的
详细规划，提高网位水面利用率，同时建立生态缓冲区，在网围外围建
立污染净化与饲草生产带，以吸收网围养殖的污染物，建立一定面积的
自然资源保护区、生态旅游区、水源涵养区和通航水道。
 与网围单养模式相比，轮种轮养可促进饵料资源再生并形成良性循环，
显著降低湖区氮、磷负荷，应得到大力提倡。如根据鱼、蟹食性上的差异
及其生态位的可交错特性, 在东太湖进行了鱼蟹轮养及水草轮种的养殖方
式研究，这种轮种轮养兼有经济与生态效益高之优点。
四、发展轮种轮养的生态养殖技术
第一节 资源利用的外部性及测算
22
五、强化水生生物合理利用
 加强对水生植被的合理利用; 
 ①合理配比养殖区与水生植物生产区面积比；②科学合理的水生植物收
获利用方式；③通过水产养殖控制沼泽化，改造茭草、杏菜等挺水和浮叶植
被，改善浅水区生态环境。④引进和推广优良水生植物品种，提高湖泊饲料
生产能力和水质净化能力。
 据计算，东太湖每生产1t河蟹向湖内释放N171.39kg、P38.08kg。不投饵
时，养殖河蟹有助于增加湖泊内的营养输出，东太湖不投饵的低密度放流养殖
每生产1t河蟹可以净输出N19.51kg、P1.24kg。东太湖网围养殖河蟹应以低密
度放流养殖为主，并在养殖后期辅以适当的投饵。同时，可在适宜的湖区适当
发展一些观光休闲渔业，既可保护环境，又能提升渔业经济效益。
六、降低投饵密度
第一节 资源利用的外部性及测算
参考文献 
1. 姜忠尽等. 中非合作能源安全战略研究[M]. 南京大学出版社, 2014.
2. 姜忠尽等.非洲农业与农村发展——非洲九国野外实地考察研究[M]. 南京
大学出版社, 2014.
3. 张振克等. 非洲渔业资源及其开发战略研究[M]. 南京大学出版社, 2014.
4. 黄贤金等. 非洲土地资源与粮食安全[M]. 南京大学出版社, 2014.
5. 甄峰,秦萧等. 非洲港口经济与城市发展[M]. 南京大学出版社, 2014.
6. 姜忠尽. 现代非洲人文地理[M]. 南京大学出版社, 2014.
7. 黄贤金. 土地政策学[M]. 中国农业出版社, 2014.
8. Yang H, Huang X, Thompson J R. Biochar: Pros must outweigh cons[J]. 
Nature, 2015, 518(7540): 483-483.
9. Yang H, Huang X, Thompson J R, et al. Enforcement key to China's 
environment.[J]. Science, 2015, 347:834-835.
10. Li H, Huang X, Kwan M P, et al. Changes in farmers’ welfare from land 
requisition in the process of rapid urbanization[J]. Land Use Policy, 
2015, 42: 635-641.
11. Zhang M, Huang X, Chuai X, et al. Impact of land use type conversion 
on carbon storage in terrestrial ecosystems of China: A 
spatial-temporal perspective[J]. Scientific reports, 2015, 5.
12. Chuai X, Huang X, Wang W, et al. Land use, total carbon emissions change 
and low carbon land management in Coastal Jiangsu, China[J]. Journal 
of Cleaner Production, 2014.
13. Chen Z, Wang Q, Huang X. Can land market development suppress illegal 
land use in China?[J]. Habitat International, 2015, 49: 403-412.
14. Xianjin Huang, Yi Li, Ran Yu, and Xiaofeng Zhao. Reconsidering the Controversial Land
Use Policy of “Linking the Decrease in Rural Construction Land with the Increase in Urban
Construction Land”: A Local Government Perspective.The China Review.2014
15. Xiaowei Chuai, Xianjin Huang, Wanjing Wang, Changyan Wu1 & Rongqin Zhao. Spatial 
Simulation of Land Use based on Terrestrial Ecosystem Carbon Storage in Coastal Jiangsu,
China. Scientific Reports.2014
16. 黄贤金，陈志刚，於冉，李璐璐. 20 世纪 80 年代以来中国土地出让制度的绩效分析及
对策建议. 现代城市研究.2013
17. HONG YANG, XIANJIN HUANG, JULIAN R. THOMPSON, ROGER J. FLOWER. 
China’s Soil Pollution: Urban Brownfields. SCIENCE LETTERS. 2014
18. Rongqin Zhao, Xianjin Huang, Taiyang Zhong, Ying Liu, Xiaowei Chuai. Carbon flow of
urban system and its policy implications: The case of Nanjing. Renewable and Sustainable 
Energy Reviews. 2014
19. Hui Xu, Xianjin Huang, Taiyang Zhong, Zhigang Chen, Jia Yu. Chinese land policies and
farmers’ adoption of organic fertilizer for saline soils. Land Use Policy. 2014
20. X. W. Chuai, X. J. Huang, W. J. Wang and G. Bao. NDVI, temperature and precipitation 
changes and their relationships with different vegetation types during 1998-2007 in Inner 
Mongolia, China. International Journal of Climatology. 2012
21. Moyi Zhang, Xian-Jin Huang. Effects of industrial restructuring on carbon reduction: An 
analysis of Jiangsu Province, China. Energy. 2012
22. Taiyang Zhong , Xianjin Huang a, Xiuying Zhang , Steffanie Scott , Ke Wang. The effects of 
basic arable land protection planning in Fuyang County, Zhejiang Province, China. Applied 
Geography. 2012
第三节 绿色GDP核算实证研究
一、绿色发展与绿色GDP核算
 
 绿色新政（Green New Deal）：潘基
文（2008）
 绿色发展：奥巴马（2008）：清洁能
源将成为重建美国经济的基础
 绿色鸿沟：胡锦涛（2009）
 生态文明：十八大（2012）
第三节 绿色GDP核算实证研究
一、绿色发展与绿色GDP核算 
 
从GDP崇拜到绿色发展
从破坏自然从协调自然
从生态损害从生态补偿
从富民到富民、福民、安民并重
 改革GDP核算体系，增加对于地方政
府绿色发展行为的引导性
第三节 绿色GDP核算实证研究
二、绿色GDP核算基本思路 
 
传统 
GDP 
废弃
物综
合利
用价
值
 自然资源损失价值 
（1）耗竭价值；水、能源 
（2）退化价值：耕地、森林
 环境污染损失价值 
（1）环境退化价值 
（2）环境损害价值 
绿色GDP=实际GDP－自然资源损失价值－环境污染损失
价值＋废弃物综合利用价值（未考虑人文损失）
第三节 绿色GDP核算实证研究
二、绿色GDP核算基本思路 
 
 水资源耗竭价值=水资源价格×水资源消耗量 
 能源耗竭价值=能源价格×能源耗竭量 
 耕地资源退化价值=耕地价格×耕地减少面积 
 森林资源退化价值=单位森林活立木单价×活立木蓄积减少量 
 虚拟治理成本＝污染物总排放量×（1－污染物排放达标率）×
单位治理成本 
 环境退化成本=人体健康损失+资产加速折旧损失+生产效益损失 
 废弃物综合利用产值 =废弃物综合利用产品×废弃物综合利用产
品价格 
第三节 绿色GDP核算实证研究
二、绿色GDP核算基本思路 
 资源价值损失 
 环境价值损失 
 绿色GDP 
第三节 绿色GDP核算实证研究
三、实证
第三节 绿色GDP核算实证研究
三、实证
第三节 绿色GDP核算实证研究
0
20
40
60
80
100
绿色GDP比重
浙江（比例最大） 江苏 全国 宁夏（比例最小）
2008绿色GDP比重比较
三、实证
第三节：绿色GDP核算实证研究
四、创新绿色发展机制
空间管制：从“全国山河一片红”到合理、
有序开发；
“红线”约束：从耕地保护红线、城市规
划线“两线”约束到耕地保护红线、建设用
地控制线、产业地块控制线、生态空间控制
线“四线”约束；
第三节：绿色GDP核算实证研究
四、创新绿色发展机制
转型发展：传统产业改造；引导高新技术
产业；现代服务业发展等，增强资金、技术
对于资源、环境要素的替代性；
精明增长：城市发展模式从蔓延向内涵、
从经济功能导向向宜居功能导向、从城市集
聚向提升乡村功能、实现城乡统筹转变；
第三节：绿色GDP核算实证研究
四、创新绿色发展机制
倒逼机制：资源环境价格杠杆，资源环境
门槛，重要资源的供给机制（如土地集约利
用），政绩考核（环保考核、碳减排等）等，
引导战略性新兴产业发展。
谢 谢 ！
第四节 资源经济学的目的及内容
课程目的： 
 了解资源经济学有关理论及内容体系
，掌握有关资源经济学的基本分析方法，
培养具有资源经济学学科基础的思维能力
、理解能力，并具有通过资源经济学理论
与方法的应用，增强分析、应对资源经济
问题的能力，包括个人行为、企业决策、
政府决策等方面的应对。
1
第四节 资源经济学的目的及内容
课程内容：（1）资源配置的一般原理
 资源经济学是应用经济学的一个分支
学科，经济学的基本理论与方法也是资源
经济学的重要内容。主要涉及：资源需求
与供给、资源稀缺、资源的可持续利用等
问题；以及分析资源产权对资源配置的作
用等。
2
第四节 资源经济学的目的及内容
课程内容：（2）不同类型资源利用配置的
理论与方法
 依据资源可持续利用的要求和原则，
介绍循环经济的有关内容；根据对资源类
型的划分，分别对耗竭资源、再生资源的
利用与配置的理论与方法进行阐述。
3
第四节 资源经济学的目的及内容
课程内容：（3）资源价值核算理论与方法
 商品的价值可以通过市场交易来事项
，但资源价值=市场价值+非市场价值；资
源用途的多宜性也需要通过资源核算来判
断资源的最佳用途选择的方法。
 介绍资源价值观的演变，资源核算的
理论与方法：资源实物核算、物质流核算
、资源价值核算。
4
第四节 资源经济学的目的及内容
课程内容：（4）环境问题及公共政策
 分析资源利用的环境问题及其产生机
理；介绍实现资源安全的资源管理手段，
即分析资源储备、资源贸易以及生态安全
等问题；探讨实现人与自然协调的资源利
用管理机制。
5
J. Geogr. Sci. 2014, 24(1): 159-176 
DOI: 10.1007/s11442-014-1079-1
© 2014 Science Press Springer-Verlag 
 
Received: 2013-01-30 Accepted: 2013-07-09 
Foundation: National Social Science Foundation of China, No.10ZD&030; National Natural Science Foundation of China, 
No.41301633; China Clean Development Mechanism Foundation, No.1214073; China Postdoctoral Science 
Foundation, No.2012M511243; No.2013T60518; The Startup Project for High-level Talented Person of North 
China University of Water Resources and Electric Power, No.201164 
Author: Zhao Rongqin (1978–), PhD and Associate Professor, specialized in land use and carbon cycle. 
E-mail: zhaorq234@163.com *
Corresponding author: Huang Xianjin (1968–), PhD and Professor, specialized in land use and resources & environmental economics. E-mail: hxj369@nju.edu.cn 
 www.geogsci.com www.springerlink.com/content/1009-637x
Urban carbon footprint and carbon cycle pressure: 
The case study of Nanjing
ZHAO Rongqin1,2, *
HUANG Xianjin1
, LIU Ying3
, ZHONG Taiyang1
, 
DING Minglei2
, CHUAI Xiaowei1
1. School of Geographic and Oceanographic Sciences, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210093, China; 
2. College of Resources and Environment, North China University of Water Resources and Electric Power, 
Zhengzhou 450045, China; 
3. College of Civil Construction Engineering, Zhengzhou Institute of Aeronautical Industry Management, 
Zhengzhou 450046, China 
Abstract: Urban carbon footprint reflects the impact and pressure of human activities on urban environment. Based on city level, this paper estimated carbon emissions and carbon 
footprint of Nanjing city, analyzed urban carbon footprint intensity and carbon cycle pressure 
and discussed the influencing factors of carbon footprint through LMDI decomposition model. 
The main conclusions are as follows: (1) The total carbon emissions of Nanjing increased 
rapidly since 2000, in which the carbon emission from the use of fossil energy was the largest. 
Meanwhile, carbon sinks of Nanjing presented a declining trend since 2000, which caused the 
decrease of carbon compensation rate and the increase of urban carbon cycle pressure. (2) 
The total carbon footprint of Nanjing increased rapidly since 2000, and the carbon deficit was 
more than ten times of total land areas of Nanjing in 2009, which means Nanjing confronted 
high carbon cycle pressure. (3) Generally, carbon footprint intensity of Nanjing was on decrease and the carbon footprint productivity was on increase. This indicated that energy utilization rate and carbon efficiency of Nanjing was improved since 2000, and the policy for 
energy conservation and emission reduction taken by Nanjing’s government received better 
effects. (4) Economic development, population and industrial structure are promoting factors 
for the increase of carbon footprint of Nanjing, while the industrial carbon footprint intensity 
was inhibitory factor. (5) Several countermeasures should be taken to decrease urban carbon 
footprint and alleviate carbon cycle pressure, such as: improvement of the energy efficiency, 
industrial structure reconstruction, afforestation and environmental protection and land use 
control. Generally, transition to low-carbon economy is essential for Chinese cities to realize 
sustainable development in the future. 
Keywords: carbon footprint; carbon cycle pressure; LMDI; Nanjing 
160 Journal of Geographical Sciences
1 Introduction 
Carbon footprint was put forward based on the concept of ecological footprint. It is the 
measure of the amount of direct or indirect CO2 emissions caused by an activity (or accumulation of a product in its life cycle) (Wiedmann et al., 2007). There are two views on the 
comprehension of carbon footprint: one defines it as carbon emission of human activities 
(Wiedmann et al., 2007; BP, 2006), that is to measure it in emission amount; the other one 
regards carbon footprint as part of ecological footprint, which means the ecological carrying 
capacity required in absorbing CO2 emission from fossil fuel combustion (Wiedmann et al., 
2007; Global Footprint Network, 2012; Zhao et al., 2011), which measures in area. The 
above two definitions both appeared in the past studies. Generally speaking, the former was 
mainly applied in the micro-level study, and the latter was mostly used in the macro-level 
study. 
The carbon footprint could be studied based on different levels, such as industries or 
products, urban & regional or national level. Carbon footprint analysis is an established method for systematically quantifying carbon sources and sinks throughout the lifetime of 
goods and services (Strohbach et al., 2012), especially on the product or industrial level. For 
example, Fan et al. (2012) analyzed the embedded carbon footprint of Chinese urban 
households. Teodoru et al. (2012) analyzed the net carbon footprint of a newly created boreal hydroelectric reservoir in northern Quebec, Canada. Wells et al. (2012) analyzed the 
carbon footprint of a paperback book, the cover and inside papers of which were produced in 
the United States and printed in Canada. Cheng et al. (2011) estimated the carbon footprint 
of China’s crop production over 1993–2007 based on the inputs of China’s agricultural activities. Filimonau et al. (2011) analyzed the carbon footprint of hotels through Life Cycle 
Energy Analysis, which provided a carbon impact appraisal method for tourist accommodation. Adom et al. (2012) analyzed the regional carbon footprint of dairy feeds for milk production in the United States. Chang et al. (2012) studied the optimal expansion of drinking 
water infrastructure system considering carbon footprint. Bakhshi and Demonsabert (2012) 
estimated the carbon footprint of the municipal water cycle. Pattara et al. (2012) discussed 
the carbon footprint of wine supply chain based on Life Cycle Analysis (LCA). The above 
studies about carbon footprint on micro-level were mostly finished through LCA Method. 
These studies gave us important thoughts and methods on the estimation and assessment of 
carbon footprint. 
On city or regional level, carbon footprint was mainly used to analyze the environmental 
impact of human carbon processes. For example, based on life cycle approach, Strohbach et 
al. (2012) simulated carbon sequestration by growing trees of urban green space project in 
Leipzig, Germany and contrasted it with all related carbon sources. Sovacool and Brown 
(2010) analyzed the carbon footprint of 12 metropolitan cities and put forward policy proposals to reduce carbon footprint. Kenny et al. (2009) compared and analyzed the performance of six carbon footprint models for use in Ireland. Schulz (2010) took Singapore as the 
case, studied the direct and indirect greenhouse gas emission footprint of a small and open 
economic system. We see that the carbon footprint researches on city or regional level were 
mostly focused on carbon emission estimation of each sector and the corresponding measures to decrease the carbon footprint. Therefore, researches on the ecological impact and 
ZHAO Rongqin et al.: Urban carbon footprint and carbon cycle pressure: The case study of Nanjing 161
carbon cycle pressures caused by urban human activities should be further strengthened. 
On national level, the studies of carbon footprint were mainly focused on the ecological 
footprint of anthropogenic carbon emissions. For example, in ecological footprint calculation of “Living Planet Report” (World Wildlife Fund, 2008), carbon footprint as a separate 
category includes not only the direct carbon emissions caused by fossil fuel combustion, but 
also indirect carbon emissions brought by foreign imports. The results showed that the global ecological footprint per capita was 2.7 hm2
, in which carbon footprint was 1.41 hm2
, 
which demonstrated that carbon footprint was very important in human ecological impact. 
Zhao et al. (2011) and Chuai et al. (2012) analyzed the carbon footprint of different industrial spaces in different regions of China, and discussed the carbon deficit of different regions. Aichele and Felbermayr (2012) evaluated the impacts of ratification of binding Kyoto 
commitments on carbon footprint and emissions, and the results highlight the difficulties of 
unilateral climate policies. 
From the above introduction, we see that the previous studies were mostly focused on: (1) 
the carbon footprint of the products or certain industrial level based on LCA; (2) the calculation of greenhouse gases or carbon emissions of human activities of different sectors. And 
the carbon footprint in the previous studies was mostly measured in emission amount, which 
is not enough to quantitatively assess the environmental impact of human activities. Through 
establishing theoretical framework and estimation method for urban carbon footprint, this 
paper estimated the carbon emission and carbon footprint, analyzed urban carbon footprint 
intensity and carbon cycle pressure of Nanjing city, and further discussed the influencing 
factors of carbon footprint through LMDI decomposition model. 
2 Data and methods 
2.1 Study area and data sources 
Nanjing, a rapidly developing city in eastern China, has a heavy chemical industry, so carbon emissions in Nanjing will increase rapidly. With rapid economic growth and urban expansion and high environmental pressure, Nanjing faces huge carbon cycle pressure, which 
is representative of developing cities in China. So we take Nanjing city as the case. For the 
urban statistical system in China is based on the administrative scope, the whole administrative areas of Nanjing was considered in this paper, which includes 11 urban districts (Xuanwu, Baixia, 
Qinhuai, Jianye, Gulou, Xiaguan, Pukou, Liuhe, Qixia, Yuhuatai and Jiangning) and two counties 
(Lishui and Gaochun) (Figure 1). The whole area is 6582.31 km2
. 
Most of our data were derived from yearbooks. Annual population, GDP, amount of urban 
waste, yields of principal crops, livestock, rice field area and industrial production were 
from the Statistical Yearbook of Nanjing City and Statistical Yearbook of Jiangsu Province; 
energy consumption data were derived from the Environmental Report of Jiangsu Province, 
Statistical Yearbook of Nanjing City, General Economic Surveying Yearbook of Jiangsu 
Province and others; living energy consumption data of Nanjing were from the Urban Statistical Construction Yearbook of China and Urban Construction Statistical Report of Jiangsu 
Province; soil data were from sampling data (100 cm in depth) in Jiangsu province by Institute of Soil Science, Chinese Academy of Sciences; land use data were from the second land 
survey data of Department of Land and Resources, Jiangsu Province. 
162 Journal of Geographical Sciences
Figure 1 The location and administrative divisions of Nanjing city 
2.2 Theoretical framework of urban carbon emissions and carbon footprint 
Urban carbon emissions include carbon emitted from both urban anthropogenic activities 
and natural processes. The former include carbon emission from energy consumption, industrial processes, straw combustion, paddy methane, human respiration, animal and wastes, 
and the latter include emissions from respiration of vegetation and soil and the carbon emission from water body (Figure 2). 
Figure 2 The framework of urban carbon emissions and carbon footprint 
On the contrary, urban carbon sinks mainly include carbon absorption through photosynthesis of vegetation and carbon sequestration of water body. Generally, with large energy 
consumption, urban carbon sinks were much less than carbon emissions. Therefore, the carbon emitted by urban human activities will be absorbed by external vegetation areas, the 
area of which represents the amount of carbon footprint, i.e., the environmental impact of 
urban anthropogenic carbon processes (Figure 2). The larger the carbon footprint, the higher 
the urban carbon cycle pressure. Through the relation of carbon sources, carbon sinks and 
carbon footprint, the urban carbon cycle pressure could be measured by carbon footprint 
intensity, carbon compensation rate and carbon cycle pressure index.
2.3 Method for carbon emission estimation 
(1) Anthropogenic carbon emissions 
ZHAO Rongqin et al.: Urban carbon footprint and carbon cycle pressure: The case study of Nanjing 163
Anthropogenic carbon emissions include carbon from energy consumption, industrial 
processes, straw combustion, paddy methane, human respiration, animal and wastes. The 
carbon estimation from energy consumption was calculated by the method of Zhao et al. 
(2012), and other items of anthropogenic carbon emissions were estimated by the carbon 
emission factors of IPCC (2006). 
(2) Natural carbon emissions 
Carbon emissions from respiration by vegetation and soil could be estimated by the following methods: 
veg veg i veg i
i
CE R Area      (1) 
 soil soil i soil i
i
CE R Area      (2) 
where CEveg and CEsoil is the carbon emission from respiration by vegetation and soil respectively, Rveg-i is the carbon emission factor from respiration of different vegetation types (forest, grassland, cropland and urban greenbelt), Rsoil-i is the carbon emission factor of soil respiration under different vegetation types (Fang et al., 1996), Areaveg-i and Areasoil-i is the area 
of different vegetation and soil types respectively.
Carbon emissions from water body could be estimated by the following method: 
CE Area CE Area CE water lake lake river river    (3)
where CEwater is the carbon emission from water body, Arealake and Areariver is the lake area 
and total drainage area of rivers, CElake and CEriver is the carbon emission factor of lake and 
river respectively. The carbon emission factor of river is 0.026 t/km2
a, which is the value of 
the Yangtze River Basin. The carbon emission factor of lake is 0.041 t/km2
.a, which is the 
value of eastern plain of China (Ye and Chen, 1992). 
2.4 Method for carbon footprint analysis 
(1) Urban carbon sinks 
Urban carbon sinks include not only carbon absorption by vegetations but also carbon 
sequestration by terrestrial water areas. In ecosystem, Gross Primary Productivity (GPP) is 
the rate at which an ecosystem’s producers capture and store a given amount of chemical 
energy as biomass in a given length of time, while Net Primary Productivity (NPP) is the 
rate at which all the plants in an ecosystem produce net useful chemical energy. Net ecosystem productivity (NEP) reflects the carbon fixation capacity of vegetation, namely, the carbon absorption amount of per hectare vegetation per year (Xie et al., 2008). The relationships between them are as follows: 
NPP GPP R   (4) 
NEP NPP RH   (5) 
where R and RH is the carbon emissions by autotrophic respiration and heterotrophic respiration. Therefore, only NEP can represent the carbon storage of ecosystem, i.e. the carbon 
sinks of ecosystem. So the carbon sink of ecosystem in this paper was measured by the vegetation carbon sinks and carbon sequestration by water body, as follows: 
C NEP Area CI s    i i water (6) 
where Cs is the total carbon sink of urban terrestrial ecosystem; NEPi is the NEP of vegeta-
164 Journal of Geographical Sciences
tion type i (i=1~4, is the forest, grassland, cropland and urban greenbelt respectively); CIwater
is the annual carbon sequestration of water body (Duan et al., 2008). Here the NEP results of 
forest and grassland were from Xie et al. (2008) and the NEP result of urban greenbelt was 
from Guan et al. (1998). The NEP of farmland was estimated by the following method: 
/ / ac d
i
NEP C S C S   (7) 
/ C CD CY H d a w aw   (8) 
where i is the crop type i; Cc isthe total carbon absorption of crops during the whole growth 
period; S is the cultivated land area; Cd is the carbon absorption of certain crop during the 
whole growth period; Ca is the carbon absorption rate; Yw is the economic output; Dw is the 
biological yield; H is the economic coefficient. The economic coefficient and carbon absorption rate of China’s main crops were from Li (2000).
(2) Urban carbon footprint 
In this paper, carbon footprint is defined as the productive land (vegetation) areas needed 
in absorbing carbon emissions, which means the ecological footprint of carbon emissions 
(Zhao et al., 2011). Since carbon emissions from rural biomass energy and straw combustion 
were considered in the total, thus the agricultural vegetation was regarded as part of the total 
carbon footprint. Here, NEP indicators were adopted to reflect the carbon absorption of different vegetations (forest, grassland, cropland and urban greenbelt, etc.). Therefore, the areas 
of productive land required in absorbing carbon emissions (carbon footprint) could be calculated. The method is as following: 
f g a u hum
f gau
P p P P CF CE
NEP NEP NEP NEP
 
   
 
 (9)
where CF is the carbon footprint (hm2
) brought by the total carbon emissions (CEhum); Pf, Pg, 
Pa and Pu is the total carbon absorption proportion of forest, grassland, cropland and urban 
greenbelt respectively; NEPf, NEPg, NEPa and NEPu is the NEP of forest, grassland, cropland and urban greenbelt respectively. For lack of the parameters in Nanjing, the values of 
NEPf, NEPg and NEPu were derived from the results of other researches in China (Xie et al., 
2008; Guan et al., 1998). The value of NEPa was estimated by formula (7). 
(3) Urban carbon footprint intensity and carbon footprint productivity 
The total urban carbon footprint could not essentially reflect the carbon effect of city’s 
economic development. Therefore, carbon footprint intensity and carbon footprint productivity was defined and applied to further analyze the relationship between carbon footprint 
and Gross Domestic Production (GDP). Carbon footprint intensity (hm2
/yuan) is the carbon 
footprint of per unit GDP, which means the vegetation needed in absorbing the carbon emissions from the production of per unit GDP. Generally, the higher the carbon footprint intensity, the lower per unit carbon footprint benefit. Carbon footprint productivity (yuan/hm2
) is 
the ratio of GDP and carbon footprint, which reflects the economic value of per unit carbon 
footprint. High carbon footprint productivity means high economic productivity and low 
energy consumption. Obviously, we can see a negative correlation between carbon footprint 
intensity and carbon footprint productivity. 
(4) Carbon footprint elasticity 
Here, carbon footprint elasticity was defined as the ratio of changing rage of carbon foot-
ZHAO Rongqin et al.: Urban carbon footprint and carbon cycle pressure: The case study of Nanjing 165
print and GDP during certain time span, as follows: 
1/
0
1/
0
1
1
t
t
t
t
CF
CF
GDP
GDP

    
  
    
 
 (10) 
where  is carbon footprint elasticity, CF0 and CFt is the carbon footprint of base year and 
the year t, GDP0 and GDPt is the GDP of base year and year t. Obviously, if the increasing 
rate of carbon footprint is higher than that of GDP, the carbon footprint elasticity will be 
greater than 1; oppositely, the carbon footprint elasticity will be less than 1. Therefore, the 
lower the carbon footprint elasticity is, the higher the carbon footprint productivity will be. 
(5) Decomposition analysis of carbon footprint by LMDI model 
In order to analyze the factors that influence the change of carbon footprint, here the carbon footprint equation was established according to the Kaya identity, as follows: 
i i
i i
C G G C P
G GP    (11)
where C is the total carbon footprint of fossil energy consumption, Ci is the carbon footprint 
of industry i, Gi is the GDP of industry i, G is the total GDP and P is the population. Here, 
we assume that: 
i
i
i
C f G
 ; i
i
G
s
G ; 
G
g P  (12) 
Then, the carbon footprint could be expressed as the product of several factors such as 
industrial carbon footprint intensity effect (fi), industrial structural effect (si), economic development factor (g) and population factor (p), as follows: 
i i
i
C f s gp   (13) 
According to equation (13), contribution value and contribution rate of each factor could 
be decomposed by LMDI model. Here, we assume that the carbon footprint of start year is
C0
 and the carbon footprint of year T is CT
. Then, the change of carbon footprint during 
study period (0–T) could be expressed as follows: 
T TT T T 0 00 0 0
i i ii
i i
fi Si g p rsd
CC C f s g p f s g p
CC CCC
        
    
 
 (14) 
0
T
f s g p rsd
C D D DD D D
C
  (15) 
where Cfi , Csi , Cg and Cp is the contribution value of each factor (fi, si, g and p) respectively; Df, Ds, Dg and Dp is the contribution rate of each factor (fi, si, g and p) respectively; Crsd and Drsd is the decomposition residuals. They could be expressed as follows: 
exp( ) Df   W Cfi ; exp( ) Ds   W Csi ; exp( ) Dg   W Cg ; exp( ) Dp p   W C ; 1 Drsd 
ln
;
D W
C  
0
0 0 ln ; ln ln
T T
ii i
fi T
i i ii
CC f C
CC f
    
0
0 0 ln ; ln ln
T T
ii i
Si T
i i ii
CC s C
CCs
    
166 Journal of Geographical Sciences
0
0 0 ln ; ln ln
T T
i i
g T
i i i
C C g C
CCg
    
0
0 0 ln ; ln ln
T T
i i
p T
i i i
C C p C
CC p
     0 Crsd  (16) 
2.5 Method for urban carbon cycle pressure analysis 
Here, several indicators were adopted to analyze the urban carbon cycle pressure, as follows: 
(1) Human carbon effect index 
Human carbon effect index was an indicator to measure the impacting extent of anthropogenic activities on urban carbon cycle. 
Chum  CEhum /Ct 100% (17) 
where Chum is the human carbon effect index, Ct is the total urban carbon emissions, which 
include anthropogenic and natural carbon emissions. 
(2) Carbon compensation rate 
Carbon compensation rate is the ratio of terrestrial carbon sink and anthropogenic carbon 
emissions. 
C C CE p s hum   / 100% (18) 
where Cp is urban carbon compensation rate. It reflects the proportion of anthropogenic 
emissions that absorbed by local terrestrial ecosystems. The higher the carbon compensation 
rate is, the stronger the local carbon sink intensity of local ecosystem will be. 
(3) Carbon cycle pressure index 
Carbon cycle pressure index (Cm) is the ratio of anthropogenic carbon emissions and terrestrial carbon sink. 
/ C CE C m hum s  (19) 
There exists negative correlation between carbon cycle pressure index and carbon compensation rate. Cm is less than 1 means the urban carbon emissions could be absorbed by 
local terrestrial ecosystems, while Cm is higher than 1 means additional external ecosystems 
are needed to absorb the excessive urban anthropogenic carbon emissions. 
3 Results 
3.1 Urban carbon sources and sinks of Nanjing 
Carbon emissions of Nanjing include both anthropogenic and natural carbon emissions. The 
former include carbon emissions from fossil energy and biomass energy use, straw combustion, industrial processes, paddy methane, animals, human respiration and wastes, while the 
latter include carbon emissions from respiration of vegetation and soil and the carbon emission from water body. In the above items, carbon emission from fossil energy was the largest 
(2625.21×104
 t in 2009), and the proportion of which increased from 69.25% to 79.68%. 
Carbon emission from industrial processes was 355.38×104
 t in 2009, which accounted for 
10.79%. All the other carbon emissions only accounted for no more than 10% in the total, 
indicated that the most carbon emissions come from urban production processes and fossil 
energy consumption (Table 1). 
ZHAO Rongqin et al.: Urban carbon footprint and carbon cycle pressure: The case study of Nanjing 167
Table 1 Carbon emissions and its composition of Nanjing city (104
 t) 
Year Fossil 
energy 
Biomass 
energy
Straw
combustion
Industry Paddy Animals Human Vegetation Soil Water Solid 
waste 
Waste 
water Total 
2000 990.15 24.75 10.71 123.53 5.54 22.50 44.94 160.14 40.33 0.0202 4.33 2.82 1429.78 
2001 991.65 23.76 10.26 152.44 4.85 25.26 42.18 168.64 43.98 0.0203 4.68 2.82 1470.55 
2002 1054.34 22.22 9.54 221.96 4.29 25.97 45.08 182.88 49.37 0.0208 4.85 2.80 1623.32 
2003 1262.69 19.08 8.26 244.17 3.74 26.69 40.29 169.00 46.35 0.0209 5.57 2.84 1828.70 
2004 1528.17 20.47 9.01 276.86 4.37 25.64 38.17 178.94 48.94 0.0209 6.28 2.85 2139.72 
2005 1939.38 19.80 8.72 319.45 4.52 24.56 36.62 175.91 48.49 0.0208 7.04 2.92 2587.44 
2006 2086.41 19.16 8.51 349.27 4.16 17.62 37.34 176.10 48.58 0.0208 7.27 2.93 2757.38 
2007 2303.80 17.06 7.67 363.39 3.86 13.06 36.51 168.68 46.84 0.0209 7.47 2.94 2971.30 
2008 2378.50 18.58 8.53 326.96 4.28 13.49 35.55 178.62 49.14 0.0209 7.71 2.94 3024.31 
2009 2625.21 17.81 8.32 355.38 4.10 12.91 34.81 176.61 48.75 0.0209 7.95 2.90 3294.78 
The total carbon sinks of Nanjing city slowly declined since 2000. It decreased from 
191.04×104
 t in 2000 to 186.28×104
 t in 2009 with a decreasing rate of 2.49% (Figure 3). 
This means that with the urbanization and the expansion of construction land, the vegetation 
land (especially the cropland) was occupied (Figure 4), which caused the decrease of total 
carbon sink function and the increase of ecological pressure of Nanjing. 
Figure 3 Carbon sinks of Nanjing terrestrial ecosystems 
Figure 4 Land use structure and its changes between 2000 and 2009 in Nanjing city 
168 Journal of Geographical Sciences
As to the composition of carbon sinks, that of cropland was the highest (63.31% in 2009). 
But the carbon sinks of cropland presented a declining trend from 152.89×104
 t in 2000 to 
117.93×104
 t in 2009, while the proportion of cropland decreased from 80.03% to 63.31%. 
The decrease of carbon sinks of cropland was mainly caused by the reducing of cultivated 
land areas, which was caused by the expansion of city and the traffic facilities (Figures 3 and 
4). With rapid economic development, more and more suburban cropland was replaced by 
industrial or residential land, which further decreased the carbon sink function of terrestrial 
ecosystem inevitably. Further, the cropland was abandoned as uncultivated by farmers was 
also one of the important reasons. This will in turn caused the decrease of total crop yield 
and biological carbon storage. The carbon sinks of forest and water body were both increased since 2000, which was caused by the expansion of forest land and water area. Especially, carbon sinks of urban greenbelt of Nanjing increased drastically from 3.76×104
 t in 
2000 to 28.11×104
 t in 2009 (Figure 3), with the proportion increasing from 1.97% to 
15.09%, indicated that trees planting in urban areas and ecological protection on natural vegetations in Nanjing obtained better ecological effect. Because there was little grassland, the 
carbon sink of it was almost negligible. Generally, with the rapid urbanization of Nanjing in 
recent years, the total carbon emissions increased drastically, which caused the increase of 
regional carbon cycle pressure. 
3.2 Urban carbon footprint of Nanjing 
From the annual structure of productive land use in Nanjing, we see that the productive land 
was relatively limited. In the four main vegetation types, the area of urban greenbelt increased rapidly, the forest presented a slightly increasing trend, while the cultivated land and 
grassland decreased obviously. Generally, the total productive land of Nanjing basically kept 
stable (about 40×104
 hm2
 annually), and the area of cultivated land was the highest, which 
accounted for about 60% in 2009 (Table 2). 
Table 2 Productive land use area of Nanjing city (104
 hm2
) 
Year Forest Grassland Urban greenbelt Cultivated land Total 
2000 6.07 0.1862 1.11 31.23 38.59 
2001 6.25 0.1790 3.75 30.52 40.70 
2002 7.18 0.0739 7.04 27.17 41.46 
2003 7.25 0.0050 7.10 26.01 40.36 
2004 7.42 0.0051 7.34 25.51 40.27 
2005 7.39 0.0051 7.52 25.50 40.42 
2006 7.40 0.0048 7.89 25.32 40.61 
2007 7.38 0.0047 8.13 25.26 40.77 
2008 7.35 0.0047 8.23 25.18 40.76 
2009 7.33 0.0047 8.32 25.10 40.76 
According to the estimation method, the NEP of each vegetation type could be obtained. 
We found that the NEP of farmland was higher than that of other vegetation types. For example, in 2009, the NEP of farmland, forest, grassland and urban greenbelt was 4.70 t/hm2
, 
3.81 t/hm2
, 0.95 t/hm2
 and 3.38 t/hm2
 respectively, which indicated that the cultivated land 
ZHAO Rongqin et al.: Urban carbon footprint and carbon cycle pressure: The case study of Nanjing 169
has the highest productivity. Although forest has high carbon storage, the annual carbon sink 
of forest is lower than that of the cultivated land because the respiration rate of forest is 
much higher than that of crops. According to the NEP of each vegetation type, the area of 
each type in absorbing per unit carbon emissions (1t) could be calculated. Because the difference of NEP, the area of each vegetation type needed to absorb 1 t carbon is quite different among farmland, forest, grassland and urban greenbelt (the area was 0.21 hm2
, 0.26 hm2
, 
1.05 hm2
 and 0.30 hm2
 respectively for them). We found that because the NEP of grassland 
was the lowest, the area of grassland required to absorb carbon was the largest. 
According to the total carbon sinks, the proportion of carbon sink and NEP of each vegetation type and the carbon footprint of anthropogenic carbon emissions could be estimated. 
Because the carbon footprint was measured by the land areas of several vegetation types, 
here, the water body was not considered in the estimation of total carbon footprint. In the 
four vegetation types, the carbon sink of cultivated land was the main part (67.79% in 2009), 
urban greenbelt next (16.16%), then the forest (16.05%) (Table 3). Based on the annual 
proportion of carbon sinks of each vegetation type, the annual land area of them in absorbing 
total 1 t carbon emission could be estimated (Table 3). Then the total vegetation areas (total 
carbon footprint) required in absorbing total anthropogenic carbon emissions could be calculated. 
Table 3 Carbon footprint of anthropogenic carbon emissions in Nanjing city 
Year 
The proportion of carbon sinks (%) Land area required in absorbing total 1t 
carbon emission (hm2
) 
Total 
anthropogenic 
carbon 
emissions 
(104
 tC) 
Total 
carbon 
footprint 
(104
 hm2
) Forest Grassland Urban 
greenbelt
Cultivated
land Forest Grassland Urban 
greenbelt
Cultivated 
land 
2000 12.85 0.0982 2.09 84.97 0.0337 0.00104 0.0062 0.1736 1229.28 263.66 
2001 13.10 0.0934 6.96 79.85 0.0344 0.00098 0.0206 0.1679 1257.91 281.55 
2002 14.66 0.0375 12.73 72.57 0.0385 0.00040 0.0377 0.1455 1391.06 308.88 
2003 16.39 0.0028 14.24 69.37 0.0430 0.00003 0.0422 0.1543 1613.33 386.46 
2004 15.72 0.0027 13.80 70.47 0.0413 0.00003 0.0409 0.1419 1911.82 428.36 
2005 16.07 0.0027 14.50 69.43 0.0422 0.00003 0.0429 0.1455 2363.02 544.99 
2006 16.14 0.0026 15.28 68.58 0.0424 0.00003 0.0452 0.1451 2532.67 589.36 
2007 17.08 0.0027 16.69 66.23 0.0448 0.00003 0.0494 0.1535 2755.75 682.68 
2008 15.82 0.0025 15.71 68.46 0.0415 0.00003 0.0465 0.1424 2796.54 644.42 
2009 16.05 0.0025 16.16 67.79 0.0421 0.00003 0.0478 0.1443 3069.39 719.08 
Through the results, we found that the total carbon footprint of Nanjing increased rapidly 
from 263.66×104
 hm2
 in 2000 to 719.08×104
 hm2
 in 2009, in which the cultivated area was 
the biggest (442.87×104
 hm2
 in 2009) with 61.59% in the total carbon footprint (Figure 5). 
Compared with total carbon footprint, Nanjing has less productive land. For example, the 
total carbon footprint and productive land was 719.08×104
 hm2 and 40.76×104
 hm2
 respectively in 2009. So the carbon deficit of Nanjing was 678.33×104
 hm2 (Figure 6), which is 
more than ten times of the total land area of Nanjing (65.82×104
 hm2
). This means that vegetation areas of total 719.08×104
 hm2
 were required in absorbing the total anthropogenic 
170 Journal of Geographical Sciences
Figure 5 Composition of total carbon footprint of Nanjing city 
carbon emissions of Nanjing. We also found that the total carbon deficit rapidly increased 
from 2000 (225.07×104
 hm2
) to 2009 (678.33×104
 hm2
), with an increase of carbon deficit 
of Nanjing by two times, indicated that the energy consumption and total carbon emissions 
increased rapidly since 2000, and the human impact on environment of Nanjing increased 
gradually. With the increase of total carbon emissions, carbon footprint and carbon deficit 
will further increase in the future.
Figure 6 Carbon footprint, productive land and carbon deficit of Nanjing city 
Although the carbon footprint and carbon deficit of Nanjing increased annually, if GDP 
was taken into account, we found that carbon footprint productivity appeared a fluctuating 
growth trend. It increased since 2000 and reached 4.36×104
 yuan/hm2
 in 2002, then declined 
to about 4.00×104
 yuan/hm2 in 2003–2007, and rapidly increased after 2007 and reached 
4.84×104
 yuan/hm2
 in 2009 (Figure 7). Generally speaking, the economic productivity 
created by per unit carbon footprint of Nanjing was increasing, indicated that the carbon 
productivity, energy utilization rate and carbon efficiency of Nanjing were improved since 
2000. With the increase of carbon footprint productivity, the carbon footprint intensity decreased since 2000, which was opposite to the trend of carbon footprint productivity. It decreased from 0.25 hm2
/104
 yuan in 2000 to 0.21 hm2
/104
 yuan in 2009 (Figure 7). This indicated that the productive land required in absorbing the carbon emissions created by per unit 
GDP was on decrease, which revealed that the energy conservation and emission reduction 
policy in Nanjing received better effect, and the impact of per unit economic production on 
ZHAO Rongqin et al.: Urban carbon footprint and carbon cycle pressure: The case study of Nanjing 171
environment decreased gradually since 2000. 
Figure 7 Carbon footprint productivity and carbon footprint intensity of Nanjing city 
3.3 Decomposition analysis of carbon footprint 
The influencing factors were decomposed into industrial carbon footprint intensity effect, 
industrial structural effect, economic development factor and population factor through 
LMDI model. And the annual contribution value and contribution rate was calculated. It 
should be noted that only the carbon footprint of fossil energy use was analyzed through 
LMDI model. 
We see that the main positive factors promoting the rapid increase of urban carbon footprint during 2000–2009 in Nanjing were economic development factor and population factor, 
in which economic development factor was the most important prompting factor, the contribution value of which exceeded the whole change value of total carbon footprint during 
time span such as 2000–2002, 2003–2004, 2005–2006 and 2007–2008. This indicated that 
without inhibitory function of other factors, the increment of total carbon footprint of Nanjing will be much higher by the influence of economic development. Population factor was 
also a promoting factor, but its contribution value was much less than that of economic development factor (Table 4). 
Table 4 Decomposition analysis of carbon footprint in Nanjing city 
Year 
Contribution value (104
 hm2
) Contribution rate (%) 
Industrial 
carbon 
footprint 
intensity 
effect 
Industrial
 structure 
effect 
Economic 
development 
factor 
Population 
factor 
The 
whole
Industrial 
carbon 
footprint 
intensity 
effect 
Industrial
structure 
effect 
Economic 
development 
factor 
Population 
factor 
The 
whole 
△Cfi △Csi △Cg △Cp △C Df Ds Dg Dp D 
2000–2001 –9.17 –4.23 19.76 3.22 9.58 0.96 0.98 1.10 1.01 1.05 
2001–2002 –12.62 –2.62 23.23 4.18 12.16 0.95 0.99 1.11 1.02 1.05 
2002–2003 27.61 3.48 33.11 4.21 68.35 1.11 1.01 1.13 1.02 1.29 
2003–2004 –21.28 9.87 45.02 6.34 39.93 0.94 1.03 1.15 1.02 1.13 
2004–2005 44.34 4.99 47.48 8.12 104.89 1.12 1.01 1.13 1.02 1.31 
2005–2006 –28.64 1.73 56.27 8.86 38.22 0.94 1.00 1.13 1.02 1.09 
2006–2007 3.16 6.85 66.64 8.56 85.21 1.01 1.01 1.13 1.02 1.18 
2007–2008 –77.20 –8.40 56.41 6.57 –22.63 0.87 0.99 1.11 1.01 0.96 
2008–2009 11.76 –8.68 58.93 4.92 66.93 1.02 0.99 1.11 1.01 1.12 
2000–2009 –44.93 5.39 387.57 54.62 402.65 0.89 1.01 2.78 1.16 2.90 
172 Journal of Geographical Sciences
The main inhibitory factors were industrial carbon footprint intensity effect and industrial 
structure effect, in which the inhibitory effect of industrial carbon footprint intensity was the 
highest on the whole. Generally, the inhibitory effect of industrial carbon footprint intensity 
presented a fluctuating trend since 2000. The total contribution value was –44.93×104
 hm2
. 
Before 2005, the inhibitory effect of industrial carbon footprint intensity was relatively weak, 
and it even presented a promoting effect in 2002–2003 and 2004–2005. After 2005, the inhibitory effect of industrial carbon footprint intensity became stronger and reached –77.20×104
hm2
 in 2007–2008. The industrial structure effect also presented a fluctuating trend. It appeared as promoting effect from 2002 to 2007, but presented as inhibitory factor in other 
time spans. Especially in 2008–2009, the inhibitory effect was the strongest (–8.68×104
 hm2
). 
As a whole, the industrial structure appeared as a slightly promoting effect in 2000–2009, 
and the total contribution value was 5.39×104
 hm2
. Therefore, the influencing factors of 
carbon footprint in Nanjing could be divided into promoting factors and inhibitory factors. 
The former were economic development, population factor and industrial structure effect, 
and the latter was industrial carbon footprint intensity effect. By sorting the contribution 
value of each factor during 2000–2009, we found that the total increasing value of carbon 
footprint was 402.65×104
 hm2
. The order of each factor was: economic factor (387.57×104
hm2
), population factor (54.62×104
 hm2
), industrial structure effect (5.39×104
 hm2
) and industrial carbon footprint intensity effect (–44.93×104
 hm2
) (Table 4). 
As for the annual changing rate of total carbon footprint, the contribution rate of economic development was the highest. During 2000–2009, the whole changing rate (D) of 
carbon footprint of Nanjing was 2.90. The order of contribution rate of each factor was: 
economic development factor (2.78), population factor (1.16), industrial structure effect 
(1.01) and industrial carbon footprint intensity effect (0.89). This indicated that the promoting function of economic development factor was the highest, which even exceeded the increasing rate of the whole carbon footprint in certain year. 
3.4 Urban carbon cycle pressure of Nanjing 
In 2009, the anthropogenic carbon emissions accounted for 93.16% (it is also called “human 
carbon effect index”) in the total, and presented an increasing trend since 2000 (Table 5). 
This suggested that with social and economic development, the impact of human activities 
on urban carbon cycle processes was on increase, while the carbon emissions from natural 
processes basically kept stable. It just presented a slightly increasing trend, and the proportion of natural carbon emissions decreased since 2000 with the increase of human carbon 
effect index. 
Nanjing is a rapidly developing city. Actually, with urban expansion, population growth 
and the increase of energy consumption and industrial production, human carbon effect will 
inevitably increase. Therefore, the total carbon footprint will increase certainly. But the natural process was quite different. If urban natural ecosystem was not disturbed seriously, the 
natural carbon productivity and carbon emission rate of vegetation and soil will not be 
changed highly. 
The carbon compensation rate decreased from 15.54% in 2000 to 6.07% in 2009, suggesting that the carbon sink function of terrestrial ecosystems was not enough to compensate 
urban anthropogenic carbon emissions. Furthermore, with the decrease of carbon sink ca-
ZHAO Rongqin et al.: Urban carbon footprint and carbon cycle pressure: The case study of Nanjing 173
pacity, the urban carbon cycle pressure increased gradually. In 2000, the carbon cycle pressure index of Nanjing was 6.43, but in 2009, it reached 16.48 (Table 6). This indicated that 
anthropogenic carbon emission was more than 16 times of carbon sinks. With the rapid urbanization process, this trend will be further strengthened. 
Table 5 Annual natural and anthropogenic carbon emissions of Nanjing city 
Year Total carbon emissions (104
 t) 
Natural processes Anthropogenic processes 
Amount (104
 t) Proportion (%) Amount (104
 t) Proportion (%) 
2000 1429.78 200.49 14.02 1229.28 85.98 
2001 1470.55 212.64 14.46 1257.91 85.54 
2002 1623.32 232.27 14.31 1391.06 85.69 
2003 1828.70 215.37 11.78 1613.33 88.22 
2004 2139.72 227.90 10.65 1911.82 89.35 
2005 2587.44 224.42 8.67 2363.02 91.33 
2006 2757.38 224.71 8.15 2532.67 91.85 
2007 2971.30 215.54 7.25 2755.75 92.75 
2008 3024.31 227.77 7.53 2796.54 92.47 
2009 3294.78 225.38 6.84 3069.39 93.16 
Table 6 Carbon compensation rate and carbon cycle pressure index of Nanjing city 
Year Carbon sinks 
(104
 tC) 
Anthropogenic carbon 
emissions (104
 tC) 
Carbon compensation
rate (%) 
Carbon cycle 
pressure index 
2000 191.04 1229.28 15.54 6.43 
2001 193.17 1257.91 15.36 6.51 
2002 199.12 1391.06 14.31 6.99 
2003 180.84 1613.33 11.21 8.92 
2004 192.04 1911.82 10.04 9.96 
2005 187.51 2363.02 7.94 12.60 
2006 186.75 2532.67 7.37 13.56 
2007 176.87 2755.75 6.42 15.58 
2008 189.20 2796.54 6.77 14.78 
2009 186.28 3069.39 6.07 16.48 
4 Discussion and policy implications 
From the decomposition analysis of carbon footprint, we see that the decrease of industrial 
carbon footprint intensity was the main inhibitory factor. Actually, the industrial energy 
consumption, especially the energy consumption in petrochemical industry, iron and steel 
industry and power generation, was the main source of carbon emissions. Therefore, the industrial energy consumption intensity should be decreased, and the industrial structure 
should be adjusted. 
The decrease of total carbon footprint was mainly caused by the declining of carbon footprint intensity of agriculture, industry and part of service industry. Oppositely, the carbon 
footprint intensity of construction and transportation industry increased since 2000, and became the main promoting factor for the increase of total carbon footprint. Therefore, the 
174 Journal of Geographical Sciences
most important sectors in carbon emission reduction are manufacturing, construction and 
transportation industries. The carbon emission intensity of these industries should be controlled to realize the inhibitory function for the increase of total carbon footprint. 
Essentially, reasonable reconstruction of industrial structure will promote carbon emission 
reduction. However, through LMDI analysis, we found that the industrial structure of Nanjing was a promoting factor of the total carbon footprint, which was mainly caused by the 
high proportion of heavy industry, and also by the high weight of industrial added value in 
the total GDP. Therefore, if the industrial structure will be further optimized, and the weight 
of service sector will be raised in the future, the industrial structure reconstruction will also 
bring better carbon emission reduction effect, and will turn into inhibitory factor in the long 
run. 
Carbon footprint elasticity is also an important index that reflects urban carbon cycle 
pressure and carbon footprint efficiency. Through analysis, we see that carbon footprint 
elasticity of Nanjing presented a fluctuating trend since 2000. Especially, it reached 1.67 and 
1.80 in 2003 and 2005 respectively (Figure 8), which indicated that the growth rate of carbon footprint exceeded that of GDP in the above two years. In spite that the carbon footprint 
elasticity of Nanjing was 0.85 during 2000–2009 as a whole, which is lower than 1, the total 
carbon emissions and carbon footprint will increase gradually along with economic development, energy consumption and urbanization. Therefore, the low-carbon development 
measures should be adopted to decrease the carbon cycle pressure of Nanjing in the future, 
especially to decrease the increasing rate of carbon footprint. 
Without human impact, regional carbon cycle process will be an absolutely natural 
process, which mainly includes the carbon flux and circulation process of photosynthesis, 
respiration, decomposition, etc. However, in urban system, natural carbon processes was 
seriously disturbed by human activities such as manufacturing, transportation, household 
consumption, energy use and land use, which highly increased the carbon footprint intensity 
and urban carbon cycle pressure, and inevitably contributed to the global warming effect. 
Therefore, to decrease the net carbon emissions, we should both consider the carbon sources 
and sinks. Except for the decrease of carbon footprint intensity of industries, strengthening 
carbon sequestration should also be considered. On the one hand, we should try to add carbon sinks through afforestation and environmental protection, and raise the carbon sequesFigure 8 The carbon footprint elasticity of Nanjing city 
ZHAO Rongqin et al.: Urban carbon footprint and carbon cycle pressure: The case study of Nanjing 175
tration efficiency of productive land. On the other hand, land use structure should be adjusted through controlling built-up areas, economical and intensive land use, returning 
farmland to forests or grassland. Through the above measures, the carbon sink capacity will 
be raised, and carbon emissions could be offset and the carbon cycle pressure will be decreased to some extent. 
5 Conclusions 
Through establishment of theoretical framework and estimation method of urban carbon 
footprint, this paper estimated the carbon emissions and carbon footprint, analyzed urban 
carbon footprint intensity and carbon cycle pressure of Nanjing city, and further discussed 
the influencing factors of carbon footprint through LMDI decomposition model. The main 
conclusions are as follows: 
(1) The total carbon emissions of Nanjing increased rapidly since 2000, in which the carbon emission from the use of fossil energy was the largest. Meanwhile, carbon sinks of 
Nanjing presented a declining trend since 2000, which caused the decrease of carbon compensation rate and the increase of urban carbon cycle pressure. 
(2) The total carbon footprint of Nanjing increased rapidly since 2000, and the carbon 
deficit was more than ten times of total land areas of Nanjing in 2009, which means Nanjing 
confronted high carbon cycle pressure. 
(3) Generally, carbon footprint intensity of Nanjing was on decrease and the carbon footprint productivity was on increase. This indicated that energy utilization rate and carbon efficiency of Nanjing was improved since 2000, and the policy for energy conservation and 
emission reduction taken by Nanjing’s government received better effects. 
(4) Economic development, population and industrial structure are promoting factors for 
the increase of carbon footprint of Nanjing, while the industrial carbon footprint intensity 
was inhibitory factor. 
(5) Several countermeasures should be taken to decrease urban carbon footprint and alleviate carbon cycle pressure, such as: improvement of the energy efficiency, industrial restructuring, afforestation and environmental protection and land use control. Generally, transition to low-carbon economy is essential for Chinese cities to realize sustainable development in the future. 
References 
Adom F, Maes A, Workman C et al., 2012. Regional carbon footprint analysis of dairy feeds for milk production 
in the USA. International Journal of Life Cycle Assessment, 17: 520–534. 
Aichele R, Felbermayr G, 2012. Kyoto and the carbon footprint of nations. Journal of Environmental Economics 
and Management, 63: 336–354. 
Bakhshi A A, Demonsabert S M, 2012. Estimating the carbon footprint of the municipal water cycle. Journal 
American Water Works Association, 104: 81–82. 
BP, 2007. What on earth is a carbon footprint? http://www.bp.com/liveassets/bp_internet/globalbp/STAGING/ 
global_assets/downloads/A/ABP_ADV_what_on_earth_is_a_carbon_footprint.pdf. 
Chang N B, Qi C, Yang Y J, 2012. Optimal expansion of a drinking water infrastructure system with respect to 
carbon footprint, cost-effectiveness and water demand. Journal of Environmental Management, 110: 194–206. 
Cheng K, Pan G X, Smith P et al., 2011. Carbon footprint of China's crop production: An estimation using 
agro-statistics data over 1993–2007. Agriculture Ecosystems & Environment, 142: 231–237. 
176 Journal of Geographical Sciences
Chuai X W, Lai L, Huang X J et al., 2012. Temporospatial changes of carbon footprint based on energy consumption in China. Journal of Geographical Sciences, 22(1): 110–124. 
Duan X N, Wang X K, Lu F et al., 2008 Carbon sequestration and its potential by wetland ecosystems in China. 
Acta Ecologica Sinica, 28(2): 463–469. (in Chinese) 
Fan J, Guo, X M, Marinova D et al., 2012. Embedded carbon footprint of Chinese urban households: Structure 
and changes. Journal of Cleaner Production, 33: 50–59. 
Fang J Y, Liu G H, Xu S L, 1996. Carbon cycle and its global meaning of terrestrial ecosystem in China. In: Wang 
G C, Wen Y P. The Measurement of Greenhouse Gases and Their Release and Related Processes. Beijing: 
China Environmental Science Press, 129–139. (in Chinese) 
Filimonau V, Dickinson J, Robbins D et al., 2011. Reviewing the carbon footprint analysis of hotels: Life Cycle 
Energy Analysis (LCEA) as a holistic method for carbon impact appraisal of tourist accommodation. Journal 
of Cleaner Production, 19: 1917–1930. 
Global Footprint Network, 2012. Ecological Footprint Glossary. http://www.footprintnetwork.org/gfn_sub.php? 
content=glossary. 
Guan D S, Chen Y J, Huang F F, 1998. The storage and distribution of carbon in urban vegetation and its roles in 
balance and oxygen in Guangzhou. China Environmental Science, 18(5): 437–441. (in Chinese) 
IPCC, 2006. IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories. 
Kenny T, Gray N F, 2009. Comparative performance of six carbon footprint models for use in Ireland. Environmental Impact Assessment Review, 29: 1–6. 
Li K R, 2000. Land Use Change, Net Emission of Greenhouse Gases and the Carbon Cycle in Terrestrial Ecosystems. Beijing: China Meteorological Press, 260. (in Chinese) 
Pattara C, Raggi A, Cichelli A, 2012. Life cycle assessment and carbon footprint in the wine supply-chain. Environmental Management, 49: 1247–1258. 
Schulz N B, 2010. Delving into the carbon footprints of Singapore: Comparing direct and indirect greenhouse gas 
emissions of a small and open economic system. Energy Policy, 38: 4848–4855. 
Sovacool B K, Brown M A, 2010. Twelve metropolitan carbon footprints: A preliminary comparative global assessment. Energy Policy, 38: 4856–4869. 
Strohbach M W, Arnold E, Haase D, 2012. The carbon footprint of urban green space: A life cycle approach. 
Landscape and Urban Planning, 104: 220–229. 
Teodoru C R, Bastien J, Bonneville M C et al., 2012. The net carbon footprint of a newly created boreal hydroelectric reservoir. Global Biogeochemical Cycles, 26, doi: 10.1029/2011GB004187. 
Wells J R, Boucher J F, Laurent A B et al., 2012. Carbon footprint assessment of a paperback book: Can planned 
integration of deinked market pulp be detrimental to climate? Journal of Industrial Ecology, 16: 212–222. 
Wiedmann T, Minx J, 2007. A Definition of Carbon Footprint. http://www.censa.org.uk/docs/ISA- UK_Report_ 
07-01_carbon_footprint.pdf. 
World Wildlife Fund, 2008. Living Planet Report 2008. www.panda.org. 
Xie H Y, Chen X S, Lin K R, 2008. The ecological footprint analysis of fossil energy and electricity. Acta Ecologica Sinica, 28(4): 1729–1735. (in Chinese) 
Ye D Z, Chen P Q, 1992. Study on Prediction of Global Change in China (2nd Part). Beijing: Earthquake Press, 
232–245. (in Chinese) 
Zhao R Q, Huang X J, Peng B Z, 2012. Research on carbon cycle and carbon balance of Nanjing urban system. 
Acta Geographica Sinica, 67(6): 758–770. (in Chinese) 
Zhao R Q, Huang X J, Zhong T Y et al., 2011. Carbon footprint of different industrial spaces based on energy 
consumption in China. Journal of Geographical Sciences, 21(2): 285–300. 
Chinese Geographical Science 2007 17(4) 289–296 
DOI: 10.1007/s11769-007-0289-1 
www.springerlink.com 
 
Received date: 2006-12-28; accepted date: 2007-09-20 
Foundation item: Under the auspices of National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 70373029), Ministry of Education Plans to 
Support the New Century Talents (No. NCET-05-0451) 
Corresponding author: XIAO Sisi. E-mail: xiao780@163.com 
Coordinative Development Between Land Use Change 
and Regional Population-Resources-EnvironmentDevelopment System 
—A Case Study of Jiangsu Province 
XIAO Sisi, HUANG Xianjin, PENG Buzhuo 
(School of Geographic & Oceanographic Sciences, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210093, China) 
Abstract: Land use change has significant influence on the operation of the Population-Resources-Environment-Development (PRED) System. Moderate land use is the key factor to ensure the coordinative and sustainable development between land use and PRED system. Based on the internal relationship between land use and PRED system, a 
PRED evaluation index system and a Press-Status-Response (PSR) model were established in this study. According to 
the expounding on the mechanism of the PSR model, we investigated the coordinative development between the 
changes of regional land use and PRED system taking Jiangsu Province as an example. The results showed that the 
orders of the Synthetic Index of Land Use (SILU) and the Variation of PRED Index (VPI) in Jiangsu are both the 
southern Jiangsu>the central Jiangsu>the northern Jiangsu. A cubic curve model was used to fit the relationship between the VPI and SILU. The inflection point of VPI was situated in 5.0 of SILU. When SILU was below 5.0, VPI increased with SILU, which will be helpful to the coordinative development between land use and PRED system. Based 
on those results, it is suggested that the land use degree of the southern Jiangsu, especially that of Nanjing City, should 
be moderately controlled at present, while land resources of the central Jiangsu and the northern Jiangsu should be 
further exploited. 
Keywords: land use change; Population-Resources-Environment-Development (PRED) system; Press-Status-Response (PSR) model; coordinative development; Jiangsu Province; China 
1 Introduction 
Land use is the activity that people use land resources to 
produce living substance according to certain socio-economic purposes (Luo et al., 2003). Reasonable land use is 
the base for coordinative development among sub-systems such as population, resources, environment and development, while unreasonable land use will do harm to 
the sub-systems and affect the sustainable use of land 
resources. However, the research on land utilization and 
its ecological effects had not caused public concern until 
the 1990s, when the International Council of Scientific 
Unions (ICSU) and International Social Scientific Unions 
(ISSU) under the research of the Global Environmental 
Change promoted the studies on land use/cover changes. 
In 1995, the book named Land Use/Cover Changes Research Plan was published by International GeosphereBiosphere Programme (IGBP) and International Human 
Dimensions Program (IHDP). Since then, land use/cover 
changes study has been gradually given priority in the 
field of the global environmental changes (Li, 1996). Especially in recent years, all kinds of acute crises, such as 
global population explosion, resources shortage, environmental degradation, etc., made the research of the regional land use change to be an important component of 
the “International Human Dimensions Program on Global 
Environmental Change” (Turner et al., 1995; Lambin et 
al., 1999; Liu, 2002). 
Nowadays, studies abroad concentrate on the processes, mechanisms and forecasts of global or regional 
land use change (Xu et al., 2002; Helen, 2001; Rik and 
Suzanne, 2004). Chinese scholars focus on the classifi-
290 XIAO Sisi, HUANG Xianjin, PENG Buzhuo 
cation, dynamic monitoring and environmental impact 
assessment of land use/cover in the whole country or 
some typical areas (Shi et al., 2000; Li, 1999; Yang, 
2002; Lin and Liu, 2002; Lai et al., 2003). Moreover, 
research of the impacts of land use on ecological environment has been generally laid on the relationships between land use and single factors like population, resources, environment and economy. For example, some 
researchers investigated the impact of land use on population (Tang and Zhao, 2005; Liao and Li, 2003), others 
mainly concentrated on the impact of land use on the 
soil, water and atmosphere (Gao et al., 2005; Zheng et 
al., 2005; Zhao et al., 2004; Zhang and Fu, 1998; Wang 
et al., 2002; Li et al., 2003). However, comprehensive 
analysis of the effects of land use on the organic system 
of “Population-Resources-Environment-Development” 
(PRED) has rarely been reported. Therefore, it is difficult for us to grasp the land use from the whole, and to 
achieve coordinative development between the regional 
PRED system and land use. 
As an open system with high complexity, uncertainty 
and multiple hierarchy, PRED system aims at coordinative development of its sub-systems including population, 
resources, environment and development. PRED index is 
used to measure the degree of coordination among the 
sub-systems. In addition, those sub-systems are also 
composed of more minor sub-systems. There are some 
corresponding relationships among those minor sub-systems, such as interdependence and interaction, mutual 
promotion and restraint, and positive and negative effects 
(Feng and Wang, 1996). Thus, the effects of land use on 
the whole PRED system can not be simply treated as the 
sum of its effects on the sub-systems. Based on the definition of the concept and characteristic of the effect of 
land use on PRED system, the objective of this study is to 
establish both a PRED evaluation index system and a 
Press-Status-Response (PSR) model to analyze regional 
coordinative development between land use and PRED 
system, particularly in Jiangsu Province. 
2 Methods 
2.1 Synthetic index of land use change (SILU) 
This synthetic index mainly explains the depth and 
breadth of the regional land use change degree by reflecting the overall changes in the quality structures of 
various land use types. 
1 1
100
n n
b a b a i ib i ia
i i
T − T T AC AC
= =
⎧ ⎫ ⎪ ⎪ =−= × − × × ⎨ ⎬ ⎪ ⎪ ⎩ ⎭
Δ ∑ ∑ (1) 
where ΔTb–a represents SILU change. If ΔTb–a>0, the 
regional land use is in a period of development, if 
ΔTb–a=0, the regional land use is never changed obviously, and if ΔTb–a<0, the regional land use is in adjustment or recession period. Ta and Tb are the SILUs at 
time a and b, respectively. Ai, land use grading index of 
land use type i. Cia and Cib, the area percentages of land 
use type i at the time a and b. n is the number of land 
use grades (Jin et al., 2003; Zhuang and Liu, 1997). 
2.2 Regional PRED index 
PRED index was calculated by establishing the PRED 
evaluation index system in this paper. Firstly, an evaluation index system was designed to take on the stability 
of the responding body, namely PRED system. This index system can provide us with the highly condensed 
information after synthesizing data. Therefore, the main 
goal of the evaluation on the regional PRED system is to 
get a comprehensive index, i.e., PRED index. 
In this index system, indicator selection not only 
complies with the intercommunity principle (e.g. comparability, stability, sustainability, scientificity, operation 
and compendiousness) (Xie, 2003; Chen et al., 2004), 
but also takes into account whether there exist the inevitable links between the land use and sub-systems of 
PRED system, in the mean time considers the traditional 
elements of the PRED system such as population, resources, environment and development. Hence, based 
on the existed achievements, we choose natural environmental indicators (including the indicators of resources and environment) and social environmental indicators (including the indicators of economy and regional exchange) to construct the regional PRED 
evaluation index system (Fig. 1). 
During the whole processes of evaluating, the most 
important thing is to determine scientific evaluation index system, to choose feasible comprehensive evaluation method, and to transform indicators. So, the means 
of index value standardization is used to eliminate dimension, which would be helpful to maintain the stability of evaluation indicators, and to increase the comparability of the comprehensive index. Entropy method 
can be applied to assessing the weight of indicators 
(Guo, 1998). 
Coordinative Development Between Land Use Change and Regional Population-Resources-Environment Development System 291
The value of fixed assets investment density, total economic density, and the density of road network are equal 
to fixed assets investment per unit area, total GDP per unit area and road network per unit area respectively 
Fig. 1 PRED index system 
It is assumed that the number of the regions of PERD 
index is m, i.e., Pi (i=1, 2, 3,…, m), and the number of 
the indicators composed Pi is n, i.e., Pij＝(Pi1, Pi2, Pi3, …,
Pin). 
max min = (+) P PP P ij ij ′ (2) 
where Pij represents the index value before standardization; Pij′ is the value of Pij after standardization; Pmax
and Pmin, the maximum and minimum index value before standardization. Meanwhile, based on the evaluation method designed above, the following equation is 
employed to weigh indicators, so we attain: 
2
1
= n
i ij j
j=
P WP ∑ ′ (3) 
where Pi stands for the comprehensive index of the regional PRED system; Wj, the indicator weight obtained 
by the entropy method. In addition, Δ P(b–a)i is the variation of PRED index (VPI) from the time a to time b. Pia
and Pib represent the regional PRED indexes at the time 
a and b, respectively. 
 Δ − P PP i b a ib ia ( ) − = (4) 
If VPI>0, the stability of PRED system is enhanced; 
if VPI≤0, PRED system stability is unvaried, or reduced. 
2.3 Press-Status-Response (PSR) model 
In order to describe the coordinative developmental relationship between PRED system and land use change, 
we established the Press-Status-Response (PSR) model, 
which is composed of three main parts (Fig. 2). 
(1) Press. Regional land use should meet the need of 
the social sustainable development, which is the source 
of “pressure”. It mainly derives from two aspects. First, 
regional construction land quickly increases along with 
the evolution of the industrialization and urbanization 
strategy. Second, it also shows different degrees of fluctuation because of the administrative and marketable 
land allocation, as well as the governmental macrocontrol on the land resources. Since land is the basic 
resources and environmental condition for human’s sur- 
292 XIAO Sisi, HUANG Xianjin, PENG Buzhuo 
Fig. 2 Press-Status-Response model 
vival and development, it is inevitably that land use 
change will have enormous influences on human production, daily life, resources and environment, which 
are all the sources of the pressure existing in this model. 
(2) Status. The pressure concerned above can increase 
the contradictions between socio-economic development 
and the need of land resources. The excessive land use 
will further threaten the sustainable development of the 
society. For a particular region, the sustainable development can be attributed to the development of the regional PRED system including population (P), resources 
(R), environment (E) and development (D) (Xie, 2003). 
Therefore, under the pressure caused by the land use 
change, the internal sub-systems and their minor 
sub-systems of PRED system will respond the changes 
of the overall PRED system. The positive effects will 
increase the stability of the PRED system, as well as the 
further exploration of the land resources. While the 
negative ones will decrease the stability, mainly reflecting in the decline of the PRED index, the shortage of the 
per capita possession of resources, the increase of environmental pollution, and the decline of regional economic development. 
(3) Response. Based on the “response” signal from 
the “status”, a series of policies and measures, such as 
the administrative, economic, technological means will 
be adopted in response of the regional land use change 
and the subsequent disorder of the PRED system. By 
doing those, we should control the system’s inner structure, change its inner organizing mechanism and make 
response to the surrounding pressures caused by the land 
use change. Meanwhile, this kind of response will also 
act as the new information entering the next new cycle 
and affect the “pressure” part of this model, thus leading 
to the changes in the parts of “pressure” and “status” in 
the oncoming cycle. So, only under the circumstances of 
benign cycle, can the regional land use and PRED system develop sustainably. 
Obviously, after a cycle, the status of the regional 
land resources is not the same as its beginning. Along 
with the changes of land use degree, regional PRED 
system has also changed. In order to maintain the sustainable development of the regional land use and PRED 
system, a benign cycle of the sub-systems in the PSR 
model and the moderate land use change are required. 
From the above analysis, it can be seen that, in the scope 
of PRED system stability, the increasing of land use will 
attribute to the coordinative development among the 
regional population, resources, environment and development, together with the further exploration of the land 
use. Nevertheless, once beyond the threshold, further 
increase of the land use degree will hinder the development of the regional PRED system. At this time, we 
should take some measures to adjust the structure, the 
extent and the mode of the land utilization. So, making 
clear the relationship between the changes of land use 
degree and PRED index is important not only to the 
moderate land exploration and management, but also to 
the regional coordinative development between land use 
and PRED system. 
Coordinative Development Between Land Use Change and Regional Population-Resources-Environment Development System 293
3 Case Study 
In this study, we take Jiangsu Province as an example to 
analyze the relationship between land use degree and 
PRED system. Jiangsu Province, an eastern province of 
China, is in the middle of mainland coastal area, and in 
the downstream plain area of the Changjiang (Yangtze) 
River and the Huaihe River. Its total area is 102.6×103 
km2
, accounting for 1.07% of China. It is composed of 
13 major cities, including Nanjing, Wuxi, Changzhou, 
Suzhou, Zhenjiang in the southern Jiangsu, Nantong, 
Yangzhou, Taizhou in the central Jiangsu and Lianyungang, Xuzhou, Huai’an, Yancheng and Suqian in the 
northern Jiangsu. In 2004, the total population of Jiangsu Province was 720.605×106
, accounting for 5.51% 
of China, and the province’s population density was 
702.34 persons/km2
, which is one of the largest population density regions in China. In recent years, Jiangsu’s 
land resources faced with tremendous pressure due to 
the industrial structural adjustment and optimization, the 
rapid urbanization and the increasing growth of population, regional human-land contradiction, which further 
increased the land use degree and consequently affected 
the stability of the PRED system. 
3.1 Land use change
From 1989 to 2004, the conversion of land resources 
occurred dramatically in Jiangsu Province. Regional 
cultivated land and unused land were reduced fast along 
with an increase in the urbanization development and 
the demand for construction land (Fig. 3). 
 
Unused land includes unused grassland, saline-alkali land, sandy land, marshes and swamps, barren earth and bare exposed rock or gravel; 
other unused land includes glacier and perennial snowfields, and parts of river, lake, reed pond, beaches, which has not been used by the human
Fig. 3 Land use structure of Jiangsu Province in 1989 (a) and 2004 (b) 
In 2004, the area of cultivated land and construction 
land in Jiangsu Province was 482×106
ha and 181×106
ha, 
respectively. The proportion of cultivated land, construction land and unused land accounted for 63.61%, 
16.93% and 19.46%, respectively. Compared with those 
of 1989, the proportions of its cultivated land and unused land reduced by 0.64% and 2.86%, while the construction land increased by 3.50%. 
The regional SILU is obtained according to Equation 
(1) (Table 1). From 1999 to 2004, 12 major cities, except for Huai’an, had positive values of the SILU, indicating that those 12 cities were all in the land use developing period. Moreover, the SILUs of these cities, 
including Nanjing, Wuxi, Changzhou, Suzhou, Zhenjiang and Taizhou, were greater than the average of Jiangsu (1.71). Except for Taizhou, the other five cities, 
which had fast development of the social economy, are 
all located in the southern Jiangsu. Among them Nanjing had highest SILU. The SILU in other seven cities 
(Xuzhou, Lianyungang, Huai’an, Yancheng, Suqian, 
Nantong and Yangzhou) were all lower than the average 
one. Those in Yangzhou and Nantong, which are parts of 
the central Jiangsu, were 1.54 and 1.21, respectively. 
The five cities in the northern Jiangsu had lower 
socio-economic development. Lianyungang and Suqian 
had lower SILU, 0.28 and 0.44 respectively. Nanjing’s 
SILU was 21 times as much as that of and Lianyungang. 
Finally, regional SILU was in the order of the southern 
Jiangsu (4.61)>the central Jiangsu (1.71)>the northern 
Jiangsu (0.41), which demonstrated that the SILU has a 
close relationship with the regional economic development. 
294 XIAO Sisi, HUANG Xianjin, PENG Buzhuo 
Table 1 Regional land use change degree of Jiangsu Province in 1999–2004①
City Nanjing Wuxi Changzhou Suzhou Zhenjiang Nantong Yangzhou 
SILU 5.86 4.12 5.35 3.59 4.49 1.21 1.54 
City Taizhou Xuzhou Lianyungang Huai’an Yancheng Suqian Jiangsu Province
SILU 2.84 1.20 0.28 –0.59 0.56 0.44 1.71 
3.2 Regional PRED index analyses 
The regional PRED index and the VPI of Jiangsu Province between 1999 and 2004 were calculated by equations (1), (2) and (3) (Table 2). 
Compared to that of 1999, PRED indexes of Xuzhou, 
Lianyungang, Huai’an and Suqian in 2004 fell down, 
which indicated that the stability of their regional PRED 
systems trends to decline. Meanwhile, PRED indexes 
Table 2 PRED index of Jiangsu Province in 1999–2004 
Natural environmental index Social environmental index Regional PRED index City 1999 2004 Variation 1999 2004 Variation 1999 2004 VPI
Nanjing 0.50 0.50 0.00 0.32 0.49 0.17 0.60 0.70 0.10 
Wuxi 0.29 0.34 0.06 0.28 0.51 0.22 0.40 0.61 0.21 
Changzhou 0.28 0.31 0.02 0.25 0.41 0.16 0.38 0.51 0.13 
Suzhou 0.24 0.34 0.11 0.28 0.41 0.13 0.36 0.53 0.17 
Zhenjiang 0.35 0.56 0.21 0.24 0.30 0.06 0.43 0.64 0.21 
Nantong 0.18 0.18 0.00 0.21 0.26 0.05 0.28 0.31 0.03 
Yangzhou 0.22 0.20 –0.02 0.21 0.26 0.05 0.30 0.33 0.03 
Taizhou 0.20 0.20 –0.01 0.19 0.25 0.05 0.28 0.32 0.04 
Xuzhou 0.33 0.24 –0.09 0.22 0.23 0.02 0.40 0.34 –0.06 
Lianyungang 0.33 0.27 –0.05 0.20 0.23 0.03 0.39 0.36 –0.03 
Huai’an 0.31 0.24 –0.07 0.22 0.23 0.01 0.38 0.33 –0.05 
Yancheng 0.24 0.25 0.01 0.17 0.20 0.03 0.29 0.32 0.03 
Suqian 0.26 0.20 –0.06 0.17 0.20 0.03 0.32 0.29 –0.03 
Sources: Environmental Protection Bureau of Jiangsu Province, 2005; Environmental Protection Bureau of Jiangsu Province, 2000–2005; Statistics 
Bureau of Jiangsu Province, 2000–2005 
of the remaining cities were increasing steadily. Among 
those cities, Wuxi and Zhenjiang had the most notable 
increase by 0.21, Yangzhou and Yancheng only had a 
slight increase by 0.03. Together, those results showed 
that along with the strengthening of the economic and 
environmental renovation, the pressures resulted from 
regional economic development on the environment in 
the southern Jiangsu and the central Jiangsu was less 
than those in the northern Jiangsu, and the regional 
PRED system of the southern Jiangsu and the central 
Jiangsu were more stable than that of the northern Jiangsu. So, the higher PRED index largely owed to an 
increase of the social environmental index. Additionally, 
combined with the above analyses, we can see a relationship between changes of the regional PRED system 
and land use. 
3.3 Regional PRED Index 
The results of the relationship between regional land use 
and PRED system are showed in Fig. 4. 
In general, regional VPI had approximately the same 
NJ: Nanjing, ZJ: Zhenjiang, WX: Wuxi, CZ: Changzhou, 
SZ: Suzhou, NT: Nantong, YZ: Yangzhou, TZ: Taizhou, 
XZ: Xuzhou, LYG: Lianyungang, HA: Huai’an, YC: Yancheng, SQ: Suqian 
Fig. 4 Response of variation of PRED index (VPI) 
to Synthetic index of land use (SILU)
trend with SILU, with highest VPI in the southern Jiangsu and lowest in the northern Jiangsu. The major 
reason was that different regions can afford diverse support for regional environmental and technological development. With the highest level of economic development in Jiangsu, the southern Jiangsu had the ability 
to provide more of this kind of support, thereby modera- 
① Ministry of Land and Resources, Government of Jiangsu Province of People’s Republic of China, 1999–2004.
Coordinative Development Between Land Use Change and Regional Population-Resources-Environment Development System 295
ting the influence of the SILU on PRED system. But the 
northern Jiangsu was unable to solve the contradiction 
existing among the economic development, land resources utilization and the PRED system’s stability. 
Meanwhile, the fluctuation degree of SILU was obviously larger than that of VPI when considering the 
whole province. The above analyses clearly showed that 
low level of socio-economic development, poor economic strength and some contradictions existing between the development of economy and environment 
were all contributed to the regional PRED system depression. 
Based on the above analyses and the fact that regional 
economic development cannot afford infinite support for 
the environment, science and technology, regional 
PRED index will not unlimitedly increase along with the 
increase of SILU. Therefore, in order to reflect the finite 
character of increase, cubic curve-fitting method was 
chosen to fit a regressive equation between VPI and 
SILU (Fig. 5). 
Fig. 5 Curve fitting between variation of PRED 
Index (VPI) and synthetic index of land use (SILU) 
 
The correlation coefficient of this equation is 0.8423, 
which indicated that the regional VPI has preferably response to the SILU. The inflexion point of the regional 
PRED index change is situated around 5 of the SILU. 
That is to say, when the SILU does not reach the value of 
the inflexion point, along with the rise of the SILU, the 
VPI will continue to rise along with the rise of the SILU. 
Once the SILU reaches to, or over the value of the inflexion point, and continues to rise, regional PRED index 
will show a declining trend. The above analyses showed 
that in the stability range of the PRED system, the rise of 
the SILU could further increase the stability of the PRED 
system. Conversely, when the land use degree is more 
than a certain threshold, further strengthening and consolidation on the land utilization will increase the instability in PRED system. Under this circumstance, regional 
economic development will be at the expense of its resources and environment, and the land use and PRED 
system of Jiangsu Province will enter into an un-sustainable development situation. 
4 Conclusions 
Combined with the above analyses, we can see that land 
use change has significant influence on the operation of 
Population-Resources-Environment-Development (PRED) System, and there exists response relationship between SILU and VPI. SILU and VPI were sorted as the 
southern Jiangsu>the central Jiangsu>the northern Jiangsu. A cubic curve model was used to fit the relationship between VPI and SILU. The inflection point of the 
regional PRED index was situated around 5.0 of SILU. 
When SILU was below 5.0, VPI increased, which will 
be helpful to the coordinative development between 
land use and PRED system. 
According to the theoretical understanding of PSR 
model, it is necessary for Jiangsu Province to take certain policies and measures, such as moderately developing and using land resources, optimizing land utilization structure, raising the saving degree of land resources utilization and so on. After that, Jiangsu Province would obtain the economic takeoff and a good circle between land use and regional PRED system. However, it should be noted that the stable range of the regional PRED system is highly variable, possibly caused 
by the indices choice of PRED system and other factors, 
such as the changes of type and quantity of resources, 
the promotion of technology, the improvement of the 
management level and so on. Therefore, Jiangsu Province should extend the stable range, promote the stability of PRED system by deepening cognition of environment, carrying out scientific developmental viewpoints as well as taking effective measures to strengthen 
scientific and technological knowledge in the near future. Only in this way, can Jiangsu Province achieve the 
sustainable, coordinative development between land use 
and PRED system without damage to the regional human security, resources and its environment. 
Furthermore, the above results only obtained by 
choosing Jiangsu Province for example. Whether there 
exists the cubic curve response relationship between 
296 XIAO Sisi, HUANG Xianjin, PENG Buzhuo 
VPI and SILU commonly in other regions or not still 
needs us to carry further studies. 
References 
Chen Changjie, Fu Xiaofeng, Ma Xiaowei et al., 2004. Study on 
compositive evaluation of sustainable development in China. 
China Population, Resources and Environment, 14(1): 1–6. (in 
Chinese) 
Environmental Protection Bureau of Jiangsu Province, 2000– 
2005. Environment bulletin of Jiangsu Province. http:// www. 
jshb. gov. cn/ jshb/ xxgk/ Moreinfo. aspx? CategoryNum = 
001002008&siteid=1. 2006-10-31. (in Chinese) 
Environmental Protection Bureau of Jiangsu Province, 2005. Outline plans for the construction of ecological province of Jiangsu 
Province. http:// www. jshb.gov.cn/ jshb/ gzzt/ showinfo. aspx? 
infoid= 37b9e396-56cd4d0a-b7e8-b45a22224143. 2006-10-30. (in Chinese) 
Feng Yuguang, Wang Huadong, 1996. The quantitative description of the coordinated development of regional population-resources-environment-economy system. China Population, Resources and Environment, 6(2): 42–46. (in Chinese) 
Gao Zhonggui, Peng Buzhuo, Yu Jianhua et al., 2005. Effect of 
land use change on soil conditions in the developed areas: A 
case of Kunshan in Jiangsu Province. Journal of Natural Resources, 20(1): 44–51. (in Chinese) 
Guo Xianguang, 1998. Application of improved entropymethod 
in evaluation of economic result. System Engineering Theory 
and Practice, (12): 98–102. (in Chinese) 
Helen Briassoulis, 2001. Policy-oriented integrated analysis of 
land use change: An analysis of data needs. Environment Management, 27(1): 1–11. 
Jin Xiongbing, Pu Lijie, Luo Yue et al., 2003. Land use and land 
cover change at county level—A case study of Kunshan City. 
Soil, (3): 204–210. (in Chinese) 
Lai Li, Huang Xianjin, Zhang Xiaoling, 2003. Study on strategic 
environment impact assessment in land use planning. China 
Land Science, 17(6): 56–60. (in Chinese) 
Lambin E F, Baulies X, Bockstael N et al., 1999. Land-use and 
land-cover change: Implementation strategy. IGBP Report 
No.48 and IHDP Report No.10. Stockholm and Sweden. 
Li Xiaowen, Fang Jingyun, Piao Shilong, 2003. Land use changes 
and its implication to the ecological consequences in Lower 
Yangtze Region. Acta Geographica Sinica, 58(5): 659–667. (in 
Chinese) 
Li Xiubin, 1996. A review of the international researches on land 
use/land cover change. Acta Geographica Sinica, 51(6): 553– 
557. (in Chinese) 
Li Xiubin, 1999. Change of arable land area in China during the 
past 20 years and its policy implications. Journal of Natural 
Resources, 14(4): 329–333. (in Chinese) 
Liao Shunbao, Li Zehui, 2003. Study on spatialization of population census data based on relationship between population dis- 
 tribution and land use—Taking Tibet as an example. Journal of
Natural Resources, 18(60): 659–664. (in Chinese) 
Lin Zhangping, Liu Xiangnan, 2002. A case study on land pattern 
under ecological security in ecotone between agriculture and 
animal husbandry in northeastern China. Chinese Journal of 
Ecology, 21(6): 15–19. (in Chinese) 
Liu Shuo, 2002. International research on environmental and 
ecological consequence of land use and land cover change. 
World Forestry Research, 15(6): 38–45. (in Chinese) 
Luo Weijian, Wang Keling, Liu Ming, 2003. Research progress on 
impact of land use and its pattern change on environment. Chinese Journal of Eco-Agriculture, 11(2): 150–152. (in Chinese) 
Rik Leemans, Suzanne Serneels, 2004. Understanding land use 
change to reconstruct, describe or predict changes in land 
cover. GeoJournal, 61(4): 305–307. DOI: 10.1007/S10708-004- 
7936-0 
Shi Peijun, Chen Jin, Pan Yaozhong, 2000. Land use change 
mechanism in Shenzhen City. Acta Geographica Sinica, 55(2): 
151–160. (in Chinese) 
Statistics Bureau of Jiangsu Province, 2000–2005. Statistical 
yearbook of Jiangsu Province. http://www.jssb.gov.cn/sjzl/tjnj/ 
index.htm. 2006-11-28. 
Tang Jianglong, Zhao Xiaomin, 2005. A comparative study on 
the population prediction models in land use planning. China 
Land Science, 2: 14–20. (in Chinese) 
Turner B L, Skole D, Sanderson S et al., 1995. Land-use and 
land-cover change: Science/research plan. IGBP Report No.35 
and HDP Report No.7. Stockholm and Geneva. 
Wang Genxu, Wang Jian, Wu Yanqing, 2002. Features of 
eco-environmental changes in Heihe River basin over recent 10 
years. Scientia Geographica Sinica, 22(5): 527–534. (in Chinese) 
Xie Zhixiong, 2003. A study on the coordinate growth of 
Shenzhen's PRED system. Journal of the Graduates Sun-yatsen 
University (Natural Science Edition), 24(4): 75–84. (in Chinese) 
Xu Xuegong, Guo Honghai, Chen Xiaoling et al., 2002. A 
multi-scale study on land use and land cover quality change: 
The case of the Yellow River delta in China. GeoJournal, 
56(3): 177–183. DOI: 10.1023/A:1025175409094 
Yang Guishan, 2002. Cropland area change and the probability of 
maintaining dynamic balance of its amount in the Yangtze 
River Delta. Journal of Natural Resources, 17(5): 525–532. (in 
Chinese) 
Zhang Yaocun, Fu Xiaofeng, 1998. The possible influence of land 
use change on the regional climatic environment in southern Jiangsu. Advance in Earth Sciences, 13(4): 410–411. (in Chinese) 
Zhao Wenwu, Fu Bojie, Chen Liding et al., 2004. Effects of land 
use pattern change on soil and water loss at the catchment scale 
in the hilly and gully area of the loess plateau of China. Acta 
Ecologica Sinica, 24(7): 1358–1364. (in Chinese) 
Zheng Yuanming, Chen Tongbin, Chen Huang et al., 2005. Lead 
accumulation in soils under different land use types in Beijing 
City. Acta Geographica Sinica, 60(5): 791–797. (in Chinese) 
Zhuang Dafang, Liu Jiyuan, 1997. Study on the model of regional 
differentiation of land use degree in China. Journal of Nature 
Resources, 12(2): 105–111. (in Chinese)
1
一、绿色发展 
 最符合自然特征的发展模式。 
 借力于自然，协调于自然，有利于自然的发展模式。 
 2010年７月６日，中共中央、国务院召开的西部大开发工作
会议上“着力发展绿色经济、循环经济”—后发展地区，不牺牲
环境发展经济;
 2010年4月29日参观世博园广东馆，鼓励广东倡导绿色生活
—发展地区持续发展路径;
 2009年9月26日G20第三次金融峰会“我们应该高度重视技术
合作对促进平衡发展的重要意义，…，尤其要加强绿色技术领域
合作，确保发展中国家用得上、用得起绿色技术，避免形成新的
“绿色鸿沟””—缩小发展差距。
 2012年 十八大提出五位一体，加强生态文明建设 
第四节 资源环境协调策略
2
 
二、排污权交易： 
 排污权交易是建立合法的污染物排放权利即排污权
（这种权利通常以排污许可证的形式表现），并允许这种
权利像商品那样被买入和卖出，以此来进行污染物的排放
控制。
 主要特点：
 成本最小化；有利于宏观调控；给非排污者表达意见
的机会；有利于优化资源配置；提高了企业投资污染控制
设备的积极性；更具有市场灵活性。
第四节 资源环境协调策略
3
三、生态资本经营模式 
 （一）生态经营理念的创新性
 美国国际纸业公司的占地50万公顷，横跨得克萨斯州、路易斯安那州
和阿肯色州的木材生产基地。
 （二）生态经营产品的创造性
 美国爱达荷州实施“河流经营计划”的一河流经营开发公司，爱达荷
州渔牧管理部门当作修复都市河流的样板工程，并被城市土地组织授予杰
出设计奖。
 （三）生态经营效益的持续性
 1978年加拿大魁北克省开始通过建立资源开发区实施资源保护，由
地方社区管理，主要提供狩猎和捕鱼等服务，之后又分别建立了大西洋鲑
鱼资源开发区和水鸟资源开发区。
第四节 资源环境协调策略
4
城市景观与地产价格：苏州
编
号
模型
名称
模型
检验R
值
价格同景观
影响度的相
关性
价格同土
地级别的
相关性
价格同容
积率的相
关性
价格同交
易年份的
相关性
模
型
1
住宅用
途地价
模型
0.902 0.397 
 
-0.312 -0.666 0.500
模
型
2
商业用
途地价
模型
0.866 0.095 
 
-0.363 -0.560 0.191
模
型
3
住宅用
途房价
模型
0.804 0.633 
 
-0.693 / 0.482
模
型
4
商业用
途房价
模型
0.639 -0.081 -0.564 / 0.435
5
中
山
陵
外
缘
景
区
环
境
整
治
范
围 
中山陵园风景区
外缘景区是围绕
紫金山周边总占
地面积约1630公
顷的范围，包括
紫金山南风景游
憩区、沪宁线南
景观改善区和山
北风景游憩区三
大区域。
四、环境综合整治绩效评估 
第四节 资源环境协调策略
6
中山门入口公园 
博爱园 
天地科学园 
钟山运动园 
城市环境整治：中山陵外缘景区环境整治
中
山
陵
外
缘
景
区
环
境
整
治
内
容
紫金山南
风景游憩区
沪宁线南 
景观改善区 
山北
风景游憩区
下马坊公园
邵家山公园
山北民风区 
东入口公园 
山水生态区 
环境综合整治美化工程主要整治措施可以分为三类： 
水体扩展疏浚整治、景区环线道路建设改造、生态林建设改造 
第四节：资源环境协调策略
7
外
缘
景
区
综
合
价
值 
城市环境整治：中山陵外缘景区环境整治
价值类型 项目 性质 价值 单位
生态环境价值
节约环境污染处理成本价值 直接效益 133.80 万元
生态服务价值 间接效益 11062. 28 万元
经济价值
相关服务业效益 间接效益 47528.47 万元
居民资产增值效益
间接效益
1312050.87 万元
社会价值
休闲游憩价
值
按支付意愿法计算
直接效益
2835.53 万元
按时间成本法计算 113202.39 万元
人文价值 间接效益 4108.40 万元
综合价值 -- 
综合效益 148.05 亿元
 外缘景区环境整治引起的核心景区的价值提升达到58646.17万元，占
中山陵核心景区综合价值的14.05%；除去核心景区固有的变化程度较小
的人文价值和生态环境价值，外缘景区环境整治引起的核心景区的价值
提升作用达到35.87%。可见，中山陵外缘景区环境整治对核心景区综合
价值的提升有很大的促进作用。
生态价值：经济价值：社会价值=1：91 ：8
第四节 资源环境协调策略
8
城市环境整治：中山陵外缘景区环境整治
主
要
结
论
 一是综合效应突出：产生了生态、社会、经济等综合效益，综
合效益达148.05亿元，与2008年全市实现地区生产总值3775亿元相
比，达3.9%；是40亿元投资（静态）的3.7倍；预期投资的3倍。
 二是民生效应突出：居民资产增值效应达131.21亿元；居民休
闲游憩价值11.60亿元，两者占综合效益89.7%，且具有持续性。
 三是群众认同度高：综合效益评估与人们认知的一致性。201
个调查样本中，认为环境整治对核心景区产生正影响的86个
（42.79%），负影响的4个（2%）。正影响或正影响为的86.87%。
 四是居民满意度提高：对环境舒适性、景观协调性、设施完善
性、交通便利性与游客环保素质等方面的满意度，整治前多集中于
一般满意状态，整治后多集中于满意状态。
第四节 资源环境协调策略
9
五、发挥土地调控职能，增强陆地生态系统修复与保护 
力度，积极优化用地结构，持续增强应对全球变化的能力。 
 
 江苏省国土开发度（19%）： 
 荷兰（15%-单位国土面积GDP是江苏的3倍；单位建设用地GDP是江苏的4倍）； 
 德国（13%-单位国土面积GDP是江苏的1.5倍；单位建设用地GDP是江苏的2.4倍）； 
 韩国6%（单位国土面积GDP是江苏的2.7倍；单位建设用地GDP是江苏的8倍）； 
 英国6%（单位国土面积GDP是江苏的1.7倍；单位建设用地GDP是江苏的6倍） 
以及全国3.6%，浙江9%。 
第四节 资源环境协调策略
10
部门 项目 用地类型归纳方法
能源部门
能源生产、加工和转换 建设用地
农林牧渔业的燃料燃烧 拆分进农地、林地和牧草地
其他部门的燃料使用 建设用地
燃料溢散、碳储存 建设用地
工业过程和产品使用 所有IPPU项目 建设用地
土地利用和农林部门
仍为林地的林地 
转变为其它用地的林地 
HWP 
林地
仍为草地的草地
转变为其它用地的草地
牲畜的肠道发酵
牲畜的粪便管理
牧草地
仍为耕地的耕地
转变为其它用地的耕地
水稻的甲烷排放
耕地氮肥、石灰施用
水田旱地的转换
耕地
其他用地的保持和变化 归纳进入各自用地类型
生物质燃烧 农地、林地和牧草地
废弃物处理 所有废弃物处理项目 建设用地
农地碳排放强度
建设用地碳排放强度
工矿用地碳排放强度 全部用地碳排放强度
11
保持的土地利用类型碳排放核算标准，全国层次2005年 单位：tC/ha
指标 农地 林地 牧草地 建设用地 湿地和水面 未利用地
用地碳排放强度 0.502 0.033 0.241 55.81 0 0 
用地碳吸纳强度 0.13 0.52 0.05 0.204 0.045 0.005 
净吸纳/排放强度 -0.372 0.487 -0.191 -55.603 0.045 0.005 
 转变的土地利用类型碳排放核算标准，全国层次2005年 单位：tC/ha 
类型 耕地 园地 林地 牧草地 建设
用地 湿地 未利
用地
耕地 -0.502 0.362 3.197 -0.781 -56.727 8.875 -3.985 
园地 -0.897 -0.033 2.802 -1.176 -57.122 8.48 -4.38 
林地 -3.732 -2.868 -0.033 -4.011 -59.957 5.645 -7.215 
牧草地 0.038 0.902 3.737 -0.241 -56.187 9.415 -3.445 
建设用地 0.418 1.282 4.117 0.139 -55.807 9.795 -3.065 
湿地 -9.377 -8.513 -5.678 -9.656 -65.602 0 -12.86 
未利用地 3.483 4.347 7.182 3.204 -52.742 12.86 0 
模拟的土地利用碳排放效果栅格图像，以2000年为例
 根据土地利用类型的碳排放强度
分析结果，以及不同土地利用类型的
碳密度差异，可以定制土地利用变化
的碳排放标准转移矩阵，作为土地利
用碳排放快速核算的基础。
土地利用结构优化碳减排潜力为84TgC，建设用地规模控制为23TgC，约为常规碳减
排的2/5。 
12
谢 谢 ！
1
本章要求：
 了解可持续发展内涵，以及资源可持
续利用的意义；
 掌握资源优化配置的基本分析方法；
 增强对循环经济型资源利用主要模式
的认识。
第五章 资源利用
2
目录
 
第一节 可持续发展理论的提出 
第二节 资源动态最优配置的经济学分析 
第三节 循环经济型资源利用 
第五章 资源利用
3
第一节 可持续发展理论的提出
一、宇宙飞船经济理论的提出
 20世纪60年代美国学者鲍尔丁指出：
地球浩渺太空中一艘宇宙飞船，人口及经
济的无序增长迟早会使船内有限的资源耗
尽，而生产和消费过程中排出的废料将使
飞船污染，此时飞船会坠落，社会随之崩
溃。
4
第一节 可持续发展理论的提出
二、宇宙飞船与资源配置
 如何认识环境与经济增长的关系？
技术进步和市场机制可自发地解决环境问题；VS 
市场机制在解决环境问题方面是无效的。
 人类必须过于依赖资源、过度消耗资
源的的经济增长方式，形成使资源得以循
环利用、永续利用的 “循环经济”发展模
式。
5
三、可持续发展与资源可持续发展利用
 可持续发展是既满足当代人的需求，
又不对后代人满足其需求的能力构成危害
的发展。
《我们共同的未来》，世界环境与发展委员会（WCED），1987
 当代人/后代人、发达地区/发展地区：
发展机会的平等。
第一节 可持续发展理论的提出
6
三、可持续发展与资源可持续发展利用
 资源可持续利用：既满足当代人对于
资源的合理需求，又不对后代人满足其资
源利用需求的能力构成危害的利用方式。
 
 均衡利用：代际均衡；区际均衡
 节约利用：提高资源配置效率
 循环利用：废弃物资源化
 
第一节 可持续发展理论的提出
1
第三节：资源贸易
一、资源贸易的内涵与形成
 1、内涵
 资源贸易是目前世界经济相互依赖关系中的重要
组成部分。在现代经济技术环境下，任何一个国家都
不可能拥有自身经济发展所必需的全部资源，在其经
济发展过程中都必须加入到国际资源关联与贸易的网
络之中。资源贸易一旦出现阻滞，就会引起世界经济
秩序的混乱，给相关国家经济发展带来沉重的打击。
2
 由于世界各国、各地区资源优劣多寡不等，种类
不一，自然与人文环境多种多样，生产力水平和经济
发展阶段等因素千差万别，使得国际资源的分布往往
集中于某些特定地区，从而形成了世界资源型产品生
产与消费空间的分离。
 随着经济社会的发展，一国或地区的资源数量、
种类、质量等难以满足现代发展的需要，从而使其资
源的汲取半径向国外扩展，形成了资源国际贸易的新
格局，进一步促进了国际经济与资源的相互依赖。
第三节：资源贸易
3
 2、形成
 资源贸易是由资源开发条件与资源消费因素共同
作用而形成的，其中资源的开发条件主要包括了资源
的自然禀赋，资源开发的资金投入和应用的科技水平；
 资源的消费因素主要包括经济发展水平，人口发
展状况和国内产业结构状况。
第三节：资源贸易
4
资源贸易演化与外部因素关系图
第三节：资源贸易
5
二、资源贸易的发展
 随着新的国际政治经济格局的建立，当今及今后
资源贸易主要呈现以下趋势：
 1、资源型产品在国际贸易中的比重呈相对下降趋势
 世界资源型产品的国际贸易在世界经济发展中长期
徘徊不前，资源型产品贸易在国际贸易中的比重在不
断下降。1965年世界资源型产品的贸易占国际贸易的
比重为44％，1990年下降为26.5％。
第三节：资源贸易
6
 主要原因是：
 ① 西方发达国家的产业结构发生了不利于初级产
品贸易的变化，如第一产业和第二产业在国民经济中
的比重不断下降，第三产业比重不断上升，导致西方
国家对农矿原料和初级产品需求的相对下降，影响农
矿初级产品在国际市场上的销量和价格；
 ② 国际分工进一步扩大和深化，国际分工由资源
型与加工型分别转化为资本型、技术型与劳动型，且
在未来国际贸易中纯粹的资源型产品比例也必将减少；
第三节：资源贸易
7
 ③ 国际资源贸易增长与世界经济增长相脱节。随
着资源利用程度的不断提高，生产所需的原材料和能
源更加节约；
 ④ 资源型产品价格长期偏低。据世界银行统计，
若按美元不变价格计算，以1979-1981年的价格为100，
到1986年，非食物的农产品原料商品的价格已跌至58，
金属和矿产原料已跌至62。1987年以来，非石油初级
产品的价格明显回升，但绝大多数产品的价格仍远低
于80年代初的水平。
第三节：资源贸易
8
 2、资源贸易在未来国际经济发展中仍起着重要作用
 在当今世界经济格局中，由于自然、经济、技术的
巨大区域差异，国际间资源的开发利用相互联系、相
互依赖的基本表现形式就是资源型产品在国际上的交
换和再分配。
 战后的世界经济发展证明，无论是发达国家，还是
发展中国家，在平等互利基础上发展国际资源贸易，
必将推动本国经济的发展，甚至促进经济的腾飞。
第三节：资源贸易
9
 3、科技进步将不断改变资源贸易格局
 科技的发展在逐步改变着世界资源进出口贸易的
格局。自然资源对经济发展的制约性越来越弱化。资
源贸易将逐步呈现以下格局：
 ① 资源贸易的种类趋向多样化；
 ② 国际资源贸易的结构将不断变化；
 ③ 从长远看新技术革命将对资源贸易的价格产生
深刻的影响。
第三节：资源贸易
10
 4、世界资源贸易将越来越依赖少数几个资源大国
 未来资源贸易格局中，经济发达的资源大国将在
未来世界资源经济中扮演越来越重要的角色。由于资
金和科技的高投入，发达国家形成了强大的资源开发
能力和极高的劳动生产率。
 目前发达国家已进入后工业化时期，经济发展平稳，
资源消费增长的速度相对降低，加之人口增长缓慢，人均
资源量逐步增加，使得少数资源出口大国，如美国、加拿
大、澳大利亚等的资源出口优势越来越明显。
第三节：资源贸易
11
 5、资源型产品出口优势不断减弱
 到20世纪末，发展中国家的出口产品中制成品的
比重虽然有了大的上升，但初级产品的比重仍将占到
一半以上。
 由于多数发展中国家与发达国家在经济和技术上
的差距将有所扩大。
 因此，随着资源稀缺的加剧，发展中国家越来越
重视本国的资源保护。
第三节：资源贸易
12
 6、发展中国家资源贸易条件呈恶化趋势
 研究表明，发展中国家资源产品的出口与发达国
家的经济发展息息相关。当西方工业国的工业增长较
快时，发展中国家输出的资源型产品相对较多；而当
西方工业国工业生产下降或停滞时，发展中国家资源
型产品出口将以更大的幅度下降。
 其一，西方发达国家竭力压低初级产品价格，抬
高工业制成品的价格，使发展中国家饱受损失。
第三节：资源贸易
13
 其二，国际贸易集团化，通过垄断资源及资源产
品，打压非集团内国家的同类资源产品。
 例如，农产品结构与摩洛哥和突尼斯类同的西班
牙和葡萄牙加入欧盟后，由于欧洲对其内部农产品市
场的保护，沉重地打击了摩洛哥和突尼斯对欧盟国家
蔬菜、水果和渔业产品的出口，使这些一度畅销欧盟
国家的产品很难再进入欧盟市场，从而严重影响了发
展中国家的资源贸易。
第三节：资源贸易
14
 其三，国际贸易流向和国际贸易商品结构发生了
对发展中国家不利的变化。发达国家相互间贸易增长
迅速，在世界贸易总额中所占比重越来越大；发达国
家与发展中国家之间的贸易增长相对缓慢。
 例如，1990年发达国家在世界出口贸易额中所占
比例达80.3％，而发展中国家仅占19.7％。国际贸易
中的这种变化对于以原料和初级产品为主要出口商品
的发展中国家的资源贸易十分不利。
第三节：资源贸易
| 江苏政协 2013 年第 4 期
中共十八大报告提出，“要把
资源消耗、环境损害、生态效益纳
入经济社会发展评价体系， 建立
体现生态文明要求的目标体 系、
考核办法、奖惩机制。”绿色GDP核
算作为体现生态文明的核算体
系，就是扣除业已纳入传统GDP核
算体系中的资源消耗、 环境损害
成本，并加上生态系统重建、生态
修复等所增加的生态效益， 从而
更加全面地反映GDP的真实发展
水平（即：绿色GDP=GDP-资源消
耗 成 本-环 境 损 害 成 本+生 态 效
益），对推进生态文明建设起到积
极作用。
通过对我省13个省辖市2011
年度绿色GDP核算后发现，经济发
展水平高的区域，经济总量大，资
源消耗成本总量也大， 但资源消
耗成本占GDP比例不一定高，这与
区域产业结构及资源利用的技术
经济水平密切相关。 产业偏重或
化工产业占比高的区域， 资源消
耗占GDP比例也高；经济后发展地
区，资源消耗成本总量较小，但资
源消耗成本占GDP比例未必低。由
此可见，绿色GDP更为科学地反映
了GDP的真实水平，对引导科学发
展具有实践意义。 率先引入绿色
GDP核算体系、开展绿色GDP核算
试点， 将有利于各级政府更为主
动地推进生态文明建设。 为此建
议：
一、破除“谁先核算谁吃亏”
的认识。推进生态文明建设，必须
要建立促进资源节约、环境治理、
生态保护的倒逼机制。 通过开展
绿色GDP核算，有利于在倒逼机制
的建立上把握先机， 推动经济进
一步转型升级。
二、传统GDP核算和绿色GDP
两套核算体系同时运行。全国要
普遍推行绿色GDP核算体系还有
一个过程。 为适应现行国际社会
核算体系比较的要求， 可以将传
统的GDP核算体系和 绿 色GDP核
算体系同时运行， 并进行资源消
耗、环境损害成本的宏观分析，积
极实施资源节约优先、 环境保护
优先战略。
三、强化节能减排及生态环
境治理投资，引导绿色经济增长。
通过加强节能减排投资， 不仅可
以促进资源及环境保护 技术提
升， 而且通过节能减排产品开发
促进经济发展转型。 同时，生态环
境、人居环境的改善，也为吸引创
新型人才、 发展创新型经济提供
了难得的竞争环境。
四、积极探索完善资源环境
经济机制。绿色GDP核算为建立完
善的资源环境产权、 价格机制提
供了动力与可能，在此基础上，建
立产权清晰、 市场配置的资源环
境产权体系和资源环境 定价机
制， 规范资源环境要素配置的收
益分配关系， 可从机制上保障经
济可持续发展。 ◆
（作者系省政协委员、南京大学教授）
建立绿色GDP核算 推进生态文明建设
■ 黄贤金
建言立论 JIAN YAN LI LUN
20


















Ecological Economics 41 (2002) 421–429
SPECIAL ISSUE: The Dynamics and Value of Ecosystem Services: Integrating
Economic and Ecological Perspectives
Accounting for the value of ecosystem services
Richard B. Howarth a,*, Stephen Farber b
a Enironmental Studies Program, Dartmouth College, Hanoer, NH 03755, USA b Graduate School of Public and International Affairs, Uniersity of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15260, USA
Received in revised form 11 October 2000
Abstract
A ‘value of ecosystem services’ (VES) may be calculated by multiplying a set of ecosystem services by a set of
corresponding shadow prices. This paper examines the role of the VES concept in measuring trends in human wellbeing. Under conventional arguments from applied welfare economics, standard measures of market consumption
may be extended to include the value of direct environmental services, which affect welfare in ways that are not
mediated by the consumption of purchased goods. The VES concept does not capture values such as ecological
sustainability and distributional fairness that are not reducible to individual welfare. And its operationalization is
constrained by the well-known limitations of nonmarket valuation methods. Nonetheless, attempts to calculate the
value of environmental services can provide insights into the tradeoffs between market activity and environmental
quality that are implicit in the process of economic growth. Such efforts can promote informed debate concerning the
achievement of sustainable development. © 2002 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved.
Keywords: Ecosystem services; Environmental valuation; Environmental accounting; Sustainable development
This article is also available online at:
www.elsevier.com/locate/ecolecon
1. Introduction
Efforts to assess the monetary value of ecosystem services play multiple roles in managing the
links between human and natural systems. At the
micro level, valuation studies reveal information
on both the structure and functioning of ecosystems and the varied and complex roles of ecosystems in supporting human welfare. Estimates of
marginal benefits can be used as signals to guide
the human use of ecosystems, providing information on the relative scarcity and qualitative condition of the natural environment. Valuation is
particularly useful in settings where institutional
arrangements (such as markets and common
property regimes) are not functioning well to
reflect the social costs of environmental degradation. Decisions about conservation or restoration
actions can lead to the misuse of resources when
not guided by some concept of value.
At the macro level, ecosystem valuation can
contribute to the construction of indicators of
human welfare and sustainability (Daly and
* Corresponding author. Tel.: +1-603-646-2752; fax: +1-
603-646-1682
E-mail addresses: rbhowarth@dartmouth.edu (R.B.
Howarth), eofarb+@pitt.edu (S. Farber).
0921-8009/02/$ - see front matter © 2002 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved.
PII: S 0 9 2 1 - 8 0 0 9 ( 0 2 ) 0 0 0 9 1 - 5
422 R.B. Howarth, S. Farber / Ecological Economics 41 (2002) 421–429
Cobb, 1989). The processes of production and
consumption not only derive inputs from natural
systems, but also alter those systems through
land-use change and the discharge of waste. Keeping track of how the transformation of ecosystems
affects human welfare in both the short and long
run is an important—and prudent—accounting
activity.
To be sure, ecosystem valuation raises important issues of data and methodology, and by no
means captures the full range of normative and
practical considerations that surround ecological
resource management (van der Straaten, 2000).
Heal (2000) for example, argues that ‘‘the emphasis on valuing ecosystems and their services is
probably misplaced,’’ while Sagoff (1988) claims
that environmental systems are connected to core
social values that cannot—or should not—be
reduced to monetary terms. These criticisms are
addressed in detail by the papers included in this
volume. Wilson and Howarth (2002) for example,
argue that ecological resource management involves questions of equity that are poorly addressed through the standard methods of
environmental valuation.
Despite these caveats, the present paper develops the case that economic valuation can contribute positively to the formulation and
evaluation of environmental policies. Environmental systems provide material and experiential
benefits that contribute directly to human well-being, and it is meaningful and important to quantify these benefits in understandable terms
(Pearce, 1993). In addition, case studies suggest
that social willingness to pay for ecological conservation often dwarfs the associated costs. A
contingent valuation study by Hagen et al. (1992),
for example, found that a U.S. Forest Service
plan to conserve spotted owl habitat in California,
Oregon, and Washington would provide annual
benefits of $7.5–55.3 billion. These benefits compare with annual costs of $1.5 billion through
reductions in timber extraction and regional economic activity. Analyses of this type confirm the
importance that the public attaches to ecological
systems.
As a specific area of practice, ecosystem valuation has recently taken a visible step forward
through the work of Daily (1997) and Costanza et
al. (1997). While Daily’s edited volume provides a
diverse set of perspectives on the links between
specific ecological services and economic values,
Costanza et al. attempt the more ambitious task
of estimating the aggregate economic value of
ecosystem services, accounting for all of the
benefits that human beings derive from natural
systems. Although constrained by the limited extent of the existing empirical literature and the
need for further research on economy–environment interactions, Costanza et al. staked the controversial claim that ecosystem services provide
global benefits of $33 trillion per year, a figure
that exceeds the gross world product by 83%.
Methodologically, this estimate was obtained by
multiplying the level of each environmental service by an accompanying shadow price that represents the marginal value of the services in
question. In this way, Costanza et al. estimated
what might be termed the ‘Value of Ecosystem
Services’ (VES)—the expenditure that would be
required to purchase available ecosystem services
at their shadow prices. This technique is
analogous to the concept of gross domestic
product (GDP), which measures the total value of
market goods and services evaluated at market
prices.
The Costanza et al. paper is both widely cited
and widely criticized. Pearce (1995) for example,
argues that environmental valuation should be
linked to the concepts of willingness to pay for
nonmarket benefits or willingness to accept compensation for nonmarket costs. Pearce notes that
the VES estimates reported by Costanza et al.
must overstate willingness to pay for ecosystem
services since the numbers in question exceed total
world income, and people cannot pay more than
this income without depleting stocks of capital
assets. In a similar vein, Pearce argues that
Costanza et al. understate the payment required
to compensate people for the loss of all ecosystem
services, which, of course, would imply the extinction of the human species—a cost that a rational
person would presumably regard as undefinably
large. Since the use of cost-benefit analysis in
applied microeconomics depends critically on the
concepts of willingness to pay and willingness to
R.B. Howarth, S. Farber / Ecological Economics 41 (2002) 421–429 423
accept compensation for environmental and economic changes, Pearce argues that the VES concept is of little relevance in the evaluation of
particular conservation programs and management strategies.
The present paper argues that there are important reasons to believe that suitably specified VES
measures are conceptually sound in the evaluation
of macro level ecological trends. As is well
known, conventional macroeconomic indicators
ignore both the contributions of nonmarket environmental services to human well-being and the
costs that the depletion of natural capital imposes
on future generations. The paper argues that the
VES approach, if implemented in a consistent
manner, offers a logical extension of conventional
methods of national accounting. While the specific data and methods presented by Costanza et
al. are provisional and open to criticism, the
method itself is worthy of development. These
conclusions flow from a simple exposition of the
concepts and methods of environmental
accounting.
2. Macroeconomic valuation of ecosystem
services: comparative statics
Heuristic insights into the problem of ecosystem valuation may be gleaned from the simplified
model presented in Fig. 1, which depicts the marginal benefits (MB) derived from the provisioning
on an environmental service (S). We might interpret S in terms of flows of an extractive resource
such as fish, timber, or agricultural products. Alternatively, S might reflect the level of amenity
services—the quiet of the woods or the existence
value of a unique ecosystem or endangered species. In either case, we shall assume that MB is a
measure of the net benefits derived from the environment, accounting for the costs of resource
harvesting and other activities required to support
and experience the service in question.
Under standard microeconomic arguments, the
total benefits derived from a given level of services
(S0) is measured by the area under the marginal
benefits curve:
B(S0)= S0
0
MB(S)dS (1)
At this level of supply, the shadow price P0
represents the marginal contribution that ecological resources make to the satisfaction of human
preferences expressed in monetary units. This
shadow price might be estimated using the familiar tools of nonmarket valuation–the travel cost
method, hedonic pricing, contingent valuation,
etc. (Pearce, 1993). Under this notation, we define
the product P0S0 as the VES rendered by this
good.
We begin our analysis by noting that the
benefits of a small change in the service level S
may be written:
B=dB
dS
S=P0S (2)
The change in VES associated with this same
change in services is also P0S, the product of the
shadow price and the change in the service level.
This conclusion is based on the assumption that
the change in services is small enough to leave the
shadow price unchanged. The inference is that for
marginal changes in environmental services, VES
provides a correct basis for measuring changes in
total environmental benefits. Accordingly, VES is
a conceptually appropriate basis for measuring
welfare changes. While this observation is of some
theoretical interest, its main importance is practical. In a world of incomplete data and scientific
Fig. 1. A heuristic model of ecosystem valuation. knowledge, it may be quite difficult to estimate
424 R.B. Howarth, S. Farber / Ecological Economics 41 (2002) 421–429
society’s full willingness to pay for environmental
services as captured by the area A+B in Fig. 1.
Point estimates of shadow prices, however, are
generally sufficient to evaluate the welfare effects
associated with small changes in environmental
services. They do not require information on the
full structure of the benefits function.
More formally, consider a static economy in
which a typical person attains the utility level
U(C, S) from the consumption of market commodities (C) and from environmental services (S)
that have a direct bearing on individual welfare
(i.e. that are not mediated by the production and
consumption of market commodities). In this context, S would include services such as the enjoyment of clean air and water, pleasant views, and
recreational opportunities. It would not, however,
include indirect services such as the provision of
timber and raw materials or the benefits of water
quality to commercial fisheries, each of which
enters the utility function through the consumption of produced goods (C).
Applied economists often measure welfare
changes in terms of the prevailing levels of production and consumption. An increase in C might
therefore be interpreted as an improvement in
‘social welfare’ given a constant state of environmental quality. Note, however, that a shift from
the point (C, S) to the alternative (C+C, S+
S) yields the change in utility:
U=U
C
C+
U
S
S (3)
An increase in consumption (C) may or may
not lead to an increase in welfare depending on
the change in ecosystem services (S).Now suppose that we define:
P=U/S
U/C (4)
as the shadow price of environmental services, or
the marginal rate of substitution between consumption and environmental quality. Under standard economic arguments, P measures an
individual’s marginal willingness to pay for an
increase in ecosystem services. Similarly, we
define:
C*=C+PS (5)
as a measure of ‘full consumption,’ including the
value of both market goods and nonmarket environmental services. From these definitions, it follows that the change in full consumption caused
by a small shift in consumption and environmental services may be used to gauge changes in the
perceived welfare of a representative member of
society. To see this, note that the definitions described above imply that:
U=U
C(C+PS)=U
C
C* (6)
Since the marginal utility of consumption is
presumably positive, it follows that an increase
(or decrease) in full consumption generates proportional changes in subjective well-being. This
highlights the need to evaluate PS when considering tradeoffs between consumption and environmental services. For example, we must compare
the value of timber harvested from a forest with
the loss of recreational value if timber and recreation are in conflict.
The points to note here are that: (1) standard
measures of market consumption are based on an
accounting framework in which the consumption
of each good is multiplied by the good’s price;
and (2) the notion of full consumption extends
this framework to include the value of ecosystem
services that directly affect people’s perceived satisfaction. Thus VES as we defined it above is an
appropriate indicator of the welfare provided directly by environmental systems. The accounting
problem is to extend consumption indicators to
include the contributions of direct environmental
services that are not explicitly linked to market
transactions.
It is important to recognize the distinction between direct and indirect environmental services
in this framework. Since consumption itself
reflects the contribution that ecosystems provide
to the production of market goods, only the value
of direct environmental services should be added
to consumption in evaluating welfare changes. Of
course, the distinction between direct and indirect
environmental services is sometimes subtle in
practical applications. Since a single service may
R.B. Howarth, S. Farber / Ecological Economics 41 (2002) 421–429 425
provide both direct and indirect benefits—clean
water benefits both swimmers and commercial
fishermen—careful attention is required to the
nature and incidence of environmental benefits in
constructing full consumption measures.
The full consumption concept does not entail
that VES represents what might be termed the
‘Total Value of Nature.’ First, the full value of
nature, understood in terms of willingness to pay
or accept compensation for changes in environmental services, is reflected by the sum of areas A
and B in Fig. 1, not just area B. Second, in
addition to providing services that directly enter
into utility functions, nature provides services that
contribute indirectly to welfare by enhancing market-based production and consumption activities.
We suggest that calculating the VES of direct
environmental services can meaningfully augment
traditional welfare accounting. The shadow value
of indirect services could be used to construct a
similar measure reflecting contributions to market
activity.
The analysis presented above focuses on a simple static economy. It is readily apparent, however, that the notion of full consumption may be
used to evaluate welfare changes in a dynamic,
intertemporal economy subject to certain caveats.
First, the structure of preferences—i.e. the roles
of consumption and the environment in promoting human welfare—must be invariant over time.
While this assumption may seem uncontroversial,
it in fact opens up important questions for social
science research. Scitovsky (1992) for example,
suggests that process such as habit formation and
relative consumption effects imply that preferences evolve and change over time. Norton et al.
(1998) and Brekke and Howarth (2000) explore
this issue in some detail as it relates to environmental and ecological economics.
Second, it should be borne in mind that the
notion of a ‘representative’ person can obscure
inequalities in society. According to Frank (2000)
more than 70% of the increase in the US standard
of living that has occurred since 1973 has been
captured by the top 1% of the income distribution, while low-income households have lost
ground. To base welfare evaluations on changes
in average consumption is thus problematic. Ideally, analysts would construct a suite of indicators
that focused on the situations of various economic
and social groups. The methods described in this
paper could, without difficulty, be extended in this
direction.
Third, questions of irreversibility and uncertainty raise key issues for environmental valuation. As is well known, scientific uncertainty may
obscure the biophysical processes through which a
given ecosystem confers benefits on human beings. If, for example, scientists overestimated the
ability of aquatic ecosystems to assimilate excess
loads of nutrients and acidifying substances, then
ecological economists would, of course, underestimate the value of waste sink services—the ability
to sustain healthy fish populations, water quality,
and recreational opportunities—provided by
lakes and rivers. Given the limits of scientific
understanding and the potential for catastrophic
costs as the result of ecological degradation, a
range of authors have embraced the concepts of
resilience (Barbier et al., 1994) and strong sustainability (Howarth, 1997) as guides to resource
management. These concepts involve maintaining
the structure and functioning of ecosystems to
provide sustained benefits for future generations,
even when such benefits cannot be quantified in
economic terms. Of course, adherence to these
principles need not imply the rejection of environmental valuation (in general) and the VES concept (in particular). As Norgaard (1989) notes,
methodological pluralism is an important guidepost in ecological economics.
Finally, we have discussed the importance of
adding direct environmental services to standard
measures of consumption in gauging welfare
changes. A wealth of evidence, however, suggests
that other nonmarket goods—such as leisure,
household production, and the quality or ‘thickness’ of social relationships—have an important
bearing on human welfare. As Daly and Cobb
(1989) point out, the material economic growth of
the last three decades has been matched by substantial reductions in the enjoyment of these
goods. There are strong reasons to include these
effects in measures of full consumption.
426 R.B. Howarth, S. Farber / Ecological Economics 41 (2002) 421–429
3. Dynamic measures of welfare and sustainability
The question of sustainability has generated a
substantial literature in ecological economics since
this concept rose to prominence in the late 1980s.
According to Pezzey’s (1989) influential definition,
an economy is ‘sustainable’ if the short-term actions of producers and consumers do not diminish
the maximum level of human welfare that can be
maintained into the indefinite future. While the
Brundtland Commission’s definition of ‘sustainable development’ entails a more structured approach in which questions of distributional equity
(addressing the basic needs of the world’s poorest
persons) and ecological sustainability (protecting
the environmental services on which all life depends) are identified as core social objectives
(WCED, 1987), Pezzey’s notion of so-called ‘weak
sustainability’ (maintaining human welfare) remains plausible and important (see Howarth,
1997).
The use of full consumption measures to evaluate welfare changes was described in the preceding
section. Given comprehensive data and careful
attention to all relevant factors, analysts could, in
principle, construct precise indicators of human
well-being for use in both historical studies and
forward-looking models of economic trends. A
‘sustainable’ economy would then exhibit constant or increasing levels of full consumption,
measured in per capita terms, over its entire time
horizon. A range of authors, however, suggest a
stronger interpretation. Atkinson et al. (1997), for
example, argue that a direct indicator of sustainability may be obtained by adjusting standard
measures of economic output—the sum of both
consumption and net capital investment—to include the value of environmental services and the
depletion of natural capital. If the resulting measure is constant or increasing from one year to the
next, then (according to Atkinson et al.) the economy is sustainable in Pezzey’s sense.
Atkinson et al.’s approach to the construction
of sustainability indicators draws on the work of
Hartwick (1977) and Solow (1986), who examined
the conditions under which a constant level of
well-being could be maintained over an infinite
time horizon in a class of theoretical models.
Consider the case of an economy in which population and technology are constant, there is no
international trade, and resources are allocated in
a fully efficient manner by private markets and
public policies. Let K measure investments in
manufactured capital net of depreciation, while
R is the change in stocks of natural capital such
as fisheries, forests, wetlands, biodiversity, and
mineral deposits. Finally, define Q as the shadow
price of natural capital, or the discounted value of
the net benefit stream obtained by a marginal
increase in resource stocks, with the discount rate
set equal to the marginal productivity of capital
investment (Hartwick and Olewiler, 1998). Under
these assumptions, a representative person will
achieve a constant level of utility if the rate of
manufactured capital investment is set equal to
the monetary value of natural capital depletion so
that:
K= −QR (7)
at every point in time. In this case, natural capital
would include all forms of environmental resources, regardless of whether their services were
direct or indirect.
The theoretical condition embodied in this
equation has fostered enthusiasm that the development of appropriate accounting procedures
might effectively resolve the problem of monitoring progress towards achieving sustainability.
Repetto et al. (1988) for example, examined
trends in capital investment and natural resource
depletion for the Indonesian economy between
1971 and 1984. While investments in manufactured capital averaged 2051 billion 1973 Rupiah
per year over this period, the depletion of
petroleum, timber, and soil resources led to unaccounted losses over half as large. In this sense,
conventional measures of capital accumulation
substantially overstate the true increase in national wealth that occurred in this economy.
The concepts and methods discussed above are
brought together in the construction of adjusted
measures of aggregate economic activity. To see
this, note that the conventional measure of net
domestic product (or gross domestic product less
depreciation of manufactured capital) is:
R.B. Howarth, S. Farber / Ecological Economics 41 (2002) 421–429 427
NDP=C+K (8)
If consumption is adjusted to incorporate the
value of direct environmental services, and if net
investment is adjusted to account for natural resource depletion, then one may define:
NDP*=(C+PS)+(K+QR) (9)
as a measure of full net domestic product. Although this indicator is sometimes interpreted as
the maximum level of full consumption that can
be sustained into the long-term future, this interpretation holds only for economies in which population, technology, and terms of trade are
constant, and where net investment exceeds the
monetary value of resource depletion at all points
in time (see Brekke, 1997). As Asheim (1994)
shows in rigorous mathematical terms, it is impossible in principle to gauge the sustainability of an
economic system based solely on current patterns
of consumption and investment. Instead, analysts
must model the economy’s development into the
long-term future, explicitly examining the impacts
of present choices on the welfare of future
generations.
Adjustments to NDP for the loss of natural
capital must reflect changes in both the physical
quantity and quality of resource stocks. Since
‘natural capital’ is defined in terms of the ability
of ecosystems to provide sustained flows of services, the qualitative impairment of ecosystems
constitutes the loss of a valuable resource. For
example, siltation and nutrient enrichment may
lead to the loss of biodiversity in a coastal wetland, even if the gross area of the wetland remains
unchanged. Some subtlety is often required in the
construction of measures to evaluate such effects.
The key point is that the variable R as defined in
this discussion represents a comprehensive index
of the state of the environment.
4. Summary and conclusions
Costanza et al. (1997) estimate that the Earth’s
ecosystems provide services worth some $33 trillion per year to human beings. In this calculation,
a set of specified services is multiplied by a set of
corresponding shadow prices to gauge the total
VES. This paper examines the theoretical foundations of ecosystem valuation, finding that the VES
concept is conceptually sound from the perspective of applied welfare economics. VES is structurally similar to the notion of gross domestic
product, which measures the total value of market
goods and services evaluated at market prices.
In constructing monetary measures of economic
welfare, it is theoretically necessary to incorporate
the value of direct environmental services–those
that bear directly on people’s perceived well-being
that are not connected to market transactions.
The list of such services is decidedly broad, and
would include the value of environmental amenities, the health services provided by clean air and
clean water, and the existence value of unique
species and ecosystems. Costanza et al.’s VES
measure is more all encompassing, including both
direct environmental services and the indirect
benefits that ecosystems provide through the production of market goods. These indirect benefits
are reflected in standard measures of market
consumption.
In the years since the concept of sustainable
development was popularized by the Brundtland
Commission (WCED, 1987), much enthusiasm
has focused on the notion that standard measures
of economic output—including the value of both
consumption and net investment—might be extended to account for the value of ecosystem
services and the loss of natural capital. Atkinson
et al. (1997), for example, argue that the notion of
full net domestic product (NDP*) provides an
index of the maximum level of economic welfare
that can be sustained over time. This interpretation, however, rests on restrictive assumptions:
Population, technology, preferences, and terms of
trade must all remain constant, while the economy must be steered by a set of institutions that
ensures that resources are allocated in a fully
efficient manner. Where these assumptions are
violated—as they typically are in real-world
economies—full NDP loses its force as a sustainability indicator. Rather than relying on simple
accounting formulae, analysts must build forecasting models that predict future environmental
and economic trends, explicitly analyzing the
428 R.B. Howarth, S. Farber / Ecological Economics 41 (2002) 421–429
tradeoffs between short-term decisions and longterm welfare. The notion of full consumption
(C*), which accounts for the value of both market
goods and nonmarket environmental services, offers a useful means of evaluating such tradeoffs.
In concluding this paper, it is useful to note
some important caveats. First, welfare measures
that emphasize a ‘typical’ or ‘representative’ member of society can provide incomplete and even
misleading insights on the performance of
economies characterized by high (and changing)
degrees of inequality. Ideally, analysts would take
a more disaggregated approach that considered
the life circumstances of a range of social groups.
Welfare indicators should account for changes in
leisure, household production, and the quality of
social interactions. Both incomes and access to
environmental services should be considered in
characterizing inequalities. In this sense, the interests of ecological economics might be more closely
linked to those of political ecology (see Daly and
Cobb, 1989).
Second, efforts to place shadow prices on certain types of ecosystem services can run into
substantial conceptual and empirical difficulties
(Heal, 2000). Some services, for example, may
lack substitutes or be seen as morally incommensurable with market commodities (Sagoff, 1988).
Moral values, although of key importance to environmental management, cannot be reduced to the
monetary calculus of cost-benefit analysis and
VES measurement. In addition, the services themselves may be connected to high degrees of scientific uncertainty. For example, attempts to value
the flood protection service provided by barrier
islands must be based on complex hydrological
models of coastal ecosystems. Uncertainties or
errors in the underlying science can generate imprecision or bias in valuation figures.
While the concept of sustainable development
entails a concern for maintaining human welfare
(Pezzey, 1989), important arguments support the
notion that the satisfaction of basic needs and the
conservation of unique environmental systems are
morally, or instrumentally, essential to ensure the
broad aims of the Brundtland Commission
(Howarth, 1997). While ecosystem valuation can
improve the basis of welfare measurement, it
sheds less light on the questions of social fairness
and ecological sustainability, the latter being more
closely linked to physical measures of environmental conditions. As Norgaard (1989) notes,
achieving sustainable development will require a
pluralist approach that involves (but does not
reduce to) questions of environmental valuation.
In this perspective, valuation, ecological assessment, and equity analysis are properly viewed as
complements, not substitutes.
Acknowledgements
This work was conducted as part of the Working Group on the Value of the World’s Ecosystem
Services and Natural Capital at the National Center for Ecological Analysis and Synthesis
(NCEAS). NCEAS is funded by the National
Science Foundation (Grant c DEB-0072909)
and the University of California at Santa Barbara.
References
Asheim, G.B., 1994. Net national product as an indicator of
sustainability. Scandinavian Journal of Economics 96,
257–265.
Atkinson, G., Dubourg, R., Hamilton, K., Munasinghe, M.,
Pearce, D., Young, C., 1997. Measuring Sustainable Development: Macroeconomics and the Environment. Edward
Elgar, London.
Barbier, E.B., Burgess, J.C., Folke, C., 1994. Paradise lost?
The Ecological Economics of Biodiversity. Earthscan,
London.
Brekke, K.A., 1997. Economic Growth and the Environment.
Edward Elgar, London.
Brekke, K.A., Howarth, R.B., 2000. The social contingency of
wants: implications for growth and the environment. Land
Economics 76, 493–503.
Costanza, R., d’Arge, R., deGroot, R., Farber, S., Grasso, M.,
Hannon, B., Limburg, K., Naeem, S., O’Neill, R.V., Paruelo, J., Raskin, R.G., Sutton, P., van den Belt, M., 1997.
The value of the world’s ecosystem services and natural
capital. Nature 387, 253–260.
Daily, G. (Ed.), 1997. Nature’s Services. Island Press,
Washington.
Daly, H.E., Cobb, J.B., 1989. For the Common Good. Beacon
Press, Boston.
Frank, R.H., 2000. Market failures. In: Cohen, J., Rogers, J.
(Eds.), Do Americans Shop Too Much? Beacon Press,
Boston.
R.B. Howarth, S. Farber / Ecological Economics 41 (2002) 421–429 429
Hagen, D.A., Vincent, J.W., Welle, P.G., 1992. Benefits of
preserving old-growth forests and the spotted owl. Contemporary Economic Policy 10, 13–25.
Hartwick, J.M., 1977. Intergenerational equity and the investing of rents from exhaustible resources. American Economic Review 67, 972–974.
Hartwick, J.M., Olewiler, N.D., 1998. The Economics of
Natural Resource Use. Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA.
Heal, G., 2000. Valuing ecosystem services. Ecosystems 3,
24–30.
Howarth, R.B., 1997. Sustainability as opportunity. Land
Economics 73, 569–579.
Norgaard, R.B., 1989. The case for methodological pluralism.
Ecological Economics 1, 37–57.
Norton, B., Costanza, R., Bishop, R.C., 1998. The evolution
of preferences: why ‘sovereign’ preferences may not lead to
sustainable policies and what to do about it. Ecological
Economics 24, 193–211.
Pearce, D.W., 1993. Economic Values and the Natural World.
MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Pearce, D.W., 1995. Auditing the earth. Environment 40 (2),
23–28.
Pezzey, J., 1989. Economic analysis of sustainable growth and
sustainable development. Environment Department Working Paper No. 15, The World Bank.
Repetto, R., Magrath, W., Wells, M., Beer, C., Rossini, F.,
1988. Wasting Assets: Natural Resources in the National
Accounts. World Resources Institute, Washington.
van der Straaten, J., 2000. The economic value of nature. In:
Briassoulis, H., van der Straaten, J. (Eds.), Tourism and
the Environment. Kluwer, Dordrecht, pp. 123–132.
Solow, R.M., 1986. On the intergenerational allocation of
natural resources. Scandinavian Journal of Economics 88,
141–149.
van der Straaten, J., 2000. The economic value of nature. In:
Briassoulis, H., van der Straaten, J. (Eds.), Tourism and
the Environment. Kluwer, Dordrecht, pp. 123–132.
Wilson, M.A., Howarth, R.B., 2002. Distributional fairness
and ecosystem service valuation. Ecological Economics
(this issue).
World Commission on Environment and Development
(WCED), 1987. Our Common Future. Oxford University
Press, New York.
1
第四节：生态安全
一、生态安全的概念及特征
 随着人口增长，资源消耗，环境污染，在经济发
展的同时，各类自然生态系统受到不同程度的威胁，
生态安全的概念应运而生。
 1、概念定义
 生态安全是指人的生活、健康、安乐、基本权利、
生活保障来源、必要资源、社会秩序和人类适应环境
变化的能力等方面不受威胁的状态，包括自然生态安
全、经济生态安全和社会生态安全。
2
 2、生态安全的主要特征
 （1）整体性和全球性
 一方面，现实世界是“人—社会—自然”复合生
态系统，这一系统是一种有机整体，
“只有一个地
球”
，人和其它生命共同享用同一个地球，地球上所
发生的一切，同所有的人和人以外的所有生命都息息
相关，表现了生态安全的共同性；另一方面，当今世
界已经处于全球化时代，环境问题成为重要的全球性
问题，生态安全问题的影响已经具有全球的规模。
第四节：生态安全
3
 （2）自然性和社会性
 生态安全以自然条件和自然资源状态的好坏为标
志，具有自然性与社会性统一的特点。
 例如，大气污染、水污染、生物污染，沙漠化、荒漠
化、土地退化，海洋、森林、草原和农田生态系统破坏等，
对生态安全的损害表现为自然现象；各种自然灾害，干旱、
洪涝、台风、海潮、地震、火山和泥石流等也是自然现象，
表现为一种自然性。
第四节：生态安全
4
 进一步地，环境污染和生态破坏，其“问题”也
表现为一种自然现象，其实质是人类长期急剧加速的
不合理利用所产生的问题，具有社会性。
 因为它主要由人类活动引起，表现为对人和社会
利益的损害，最后将由人和社会活动加以承担，表现
为一种社会性。
第四节：生态安全
5
 （3）综合性和复杂性
 在国家安全网络中，传统安全多表现单一性特点，
如火灾安全。生态安全则具有综合性。
 其综合性是指它是全部生态安全要素，包括森林、
海洋、草原和农田四大生命系统，大气、水和能源等
矿产资源三大环境系统的安全性的综合，而不仅是指
其单个要素的安全性。
第四节：生态安全
6
 （4）长期性和永久性
 生物圈的物质生产是物质循环的无废料的生产过
程，只要有太阳能的供给，它就是一个无限发展的过
程，提供了长期性和永久性的生态安全，对人类生存
和发展的支持是无私的、全面的。
 人类要追求自身的持续发展，就是要祈望长期和
永久的生态安全。
第四节：生态安全
7
 （5）多元性、区域性和层次性
 生态安全问题的表现是具体的。首先，它的要素
的多元性，如环境污染、生态破坏和资源紧缺等现象，
具有多元的性质；其次，它的区域性，以一个地区一
个区域的问题表现出来；第三，它的层次性，最大的
层次是全球的，如地球增温、臭氧层破坏、酸雨等；
次一级是大陆和海洋的层次；再一级是地区性的，或
社区等局部的。
第四节：生态安全
8
 （6）滞后性和不确定性
 生态安全问题主要是由人和社会活动引起的，与
这种活动产生的经济价值相比较，其不良的环境后果
可能会在很久以后才表现出来，因此具有滞后性和不
确定性。
 问题的滞后性是普遍的，大气和水源受到污染，
土地受到侵蚀，沙漠化、荒漠化和土地退化慢慢地出
现，森林慢慢地消失，其严重性一时难以发现，环境
危害从开始到“崩溃点”的出现有一个过程。
第四节：生态安全
9
 另一方面，生态安全问题的形成是多因素的综合
作用，有的因素单独起作用，更多是迭加地起作用。
这种“迭加作用”又称“增效作用”
。因为这种作用
是缓慢的、一时难以确定。只是当这些变化变得非常
明显和非常严重、并对人类利益造成严重损害时，才
为人们发现，引起人们警觉。
第四节：生态安全
10
二、生态安全与资源安全
 资源安全与生态安全密不可分。资源安全不仅包括
资源供应的安全性，还包括开发和使用方面的安全，主
要指人类经济活动所造成的生态破坏和环境污染。
 生态安全是从人类对自然资源的利用与人类生存环
境辨识的角度来分析与评价自然和半自然的生态系统，
其重点主要是土地、水源、天然林、地下矿产、动植物
种质资源、大气等自然资源，同时解决生态环境问题。
第四节：生态安全
11
 资源和生态安全是国家社会政治稳定的基础，石
油恐慌、水危机、粮食短缺、沙尘暴肆虐等势必在一
定程度上引发社会和政治动荡。所以，保障资源和生
态安全是国家的政治需要。
 我国在资源和生态安全方面已经取得了举世瞩目
的成就，如与生态和资源相关法律的出台；三北防护
林、长江中上游防护林体系的建设；大批的自然保护
区建立也使我国的资源和生态安全有了一定的改善。
第四节：生态安全
12
三、生态安全战略
 生态安全问题的解决同人类生存方式的改变相
关，要求确立新的价值观，并在新的价值观的指导
下，发展新的生产方式和生活方式。
 就我国当前具体现状来看，维护和建设我国生
态安全的策略可以从下几个方面分析：
第四节：生态安全
13
 （1）树立维护生态安全的危机感
 一国生态是否安全在很大程度上取决于该国民众
对生态环境的干扰程度的大小，因此，维护生态安全
第一重要的就是在民众中树立维护生态安全的危机感。
要用各种方式将这种自觉维护生态安全的观点深植于
广大民众的内心深处，让人们切实认识到我国生态安
全问题的紧迫性，形成一种全民族的文化氛围从而才
能自觉地停止对生态的破坏行为，树立维护生态安全
的观念。
第四节：生态安全
14
 （2）加速经济增长方式转变
 现在我国已奠定了坚实的经济基础，在以后的发
展中应注重工、农业生产的技术改造，注意生产技术
向高质量的生态型技术转变，要彻底放弃落后的粗放
型生产方式。
 特别是在引进外资项目时应注意引进环保型技术，
以促进我国生产方式向集约型生产方式的转变。
第四节：生态安全
15
 （3）加快建立生态安全评价指标
 目前大多数人对生态安全的具体内容不甚了解，
人们并不知道自己的行为或生活方式是否与维护生态
安全的目标相一致，从而也就失去了社会衡量标准，
这就涉及到生态安全的评价指标问题。
 因此，尽快研制出我国生态安全的评价指标体系
是目前的首要问题，建设和维护生态安全离不开科学
的安全衡量指标。
第四节：生态安全
16
 （4）加强生态安全的法制建设
 我国人口众多,各地区平均受教育水平状况差别较
大，要实现国家生态安全仅仅依靠宣传、引导是远远
不够的，依靠法律手段来推进我国生态安全建设是必
不可少的。
 一方面我们要完善现有的法律并加强执法力度，
另一方面，要尽快出台生态安全法规，对破坏生态安
全的行为作出明确规定，对违法者要进行严厉的处罚。
第四节：生态安全
17
 （5）增加国家生态安全建设的政府投入
 生态安全是国家安全的重要组成部分。因此，生
态建设应是政府职能的重要组成。
 很多生态安全方面的投入，对投入主体来讲，效
益并不直接，但其社会效益却巨大而深远。
 这样的投入单靠社会力量是远远不足的，必须主
要靠政府的力量。
第四节：生态安全
18
 （6）建立有利于国家生态安全建设的利益机制，
大力发展生态产业和生态经济
 生态建设政府责无旁贷，但政府的力量毕竟有限，
必须建立社会各界和人民群众广泛参与的联动和利益
机制，调动社会各方面的力量投入生态建设。
 对农民、企业和其他社会组织和个人进行小流域
治理、在水土流失区植树种草以及从事其他有利于改
善生态环境的各种开发行为，要给予鼓励，保护其投
资收益。
第四节：生态安全
19
 要鼓励农民、企业和其他社会组织通过承包、拍
卖、合作开发等多种形式，进行生态开发与建设，所
涉及土地的使用权要长期不变，并允许继承、转让，
以促进长期生态投资。
 生态建设项目，投资大，见效慢，投资回收难，
国家银行应设立专门的长期贷款，来支持社会各方面
力量参与生态建设，有些项目国家财政要给予适当的
补贴。国家农业综合开发也应当将生态脆弱区的生态
建设和经济开发作为重点，坚决停止新的开荒。
第四节：生态安全
1
第二节：碳排放核算及分析
2
 政府间气候变化专业委员会（IPCC）四次评估
报告（1990/1995/2001/2007）：20世纪全球地
面空气温度平均上升了0.4℃～0.8℃，21世纪
将上0.4℃～5.8℃
 二氧化碳（CO2）和甲烷（CH4）的增温效应分别
占70%和23%
 1850-2005美国约占全球累计排放的28.7％，中
国占8.0％
 中美两国2005年的碳排放规模相当，约为全球
当年排放量的20％
第二节 碳排放核算及分析
3
英国风险评估公司MAPLECROFT报告
国家 碳排放量（亿吨） 人口（亿人口） 人均碳排放量（吨） 
中国 60 13.19 4.62 
美国 59 3.02 19.54 
俄罗斯 17 1.42 11.97 
印度 12.9 11.69 1.10 
日本 12.47 1.28 9.74 
德国 8.6 0.823 10.45 
加拿大 6.1 0.322 18.94 
英国 5.86 0.601 9.75 
韩国 5.14 0.483 10.64 
伊朗 4.71 0.683 6.90 
第二节 碳排放核算及分析
4
 从人均排放来看，中国（1.34吨）略高于全球
平均水平（1.25吨） 
0
1500
3000
4500
6000
7500
9000
中国 美国 欧盟 日本 印度 全球
百万吨碳
0.00
1.00
2.00
3.00
4.00
5.00
6.00
吨碳 人/
总量 人均
第二节 碳排放核算及分析
5
国家或 各国承诺的减排最新动向表
地区
基准
年
承诺方
式
减排目标
欧盟 1990 强制性
2020年减排20%；2050年减排60％-80％ 
(可能提高到2020减排30%，2050年减排80-95％
) 
日本 1990 强制性 2020年温室气体排放减排25% 
美国 2005 强制性 2020年减排17%（仅相当于1990年基准的减排4
％）；2030年减排42%，2050年减排83%。 
俄罗斯 1990 强制性 2020年减排20％-25% 
中国 2005 强制性 2020年单位GDP碳排放比2005年下降40％-45% 
巴西 不详 自愿性 2020年减排36.1％-38.9% 
韩国 2005 自愿性 2020年减排4% 
印度 无 自愿性 与8%-9%经济增长率保持一致 
第二节 碳排放核算及分析
6
 实现机制：联合履约（Joint Implementation，简称JI）、 
 排放贸易（Emission Trading，简称ET）和清洁发展机制（ 
 Clean Development Mechanism，简称CDM）； 
 碳排放权交易：2006年全球碳交易总额300亿美元，欧洲排 
 放权交易就占到了244亿美元； 
 长期发展：发展中国家现在开始以每年GDP的1％进行低碳 
 经济投资，就可以避免将来每年GDP5-20％的经济损失
（Stern）； 
 近期发展：若按30美元/吨征收碳关税，2000-2008年每年 
 带来2%左右GDP损失，2008、09GDP损失分别为1.56%和1.51%。 
第二节 碳排放核算及分析
7
 大多学者认为：低碳经济（low-carbon economy），就是
最大限度地减少煤炭和石油等高碳能源消耗的经济，也就是以低
能耗、低污染为基础的经济。
 我们认为：低碳经济是以实现碳减排为目标的经济活动过程
及规律，是以低碳排放为目标的循环经济。
 低碳城市、低碳建筑、低碳社区、低碳生活等
 碳汇、碳源：《联合国气候变化框架公约》（UNFCCC）
将碳汇定义为从大气中清除二氧化碳等温室气体的过程、活动或
机制；将碳源定义为向大气中释放二氧化碳等温室气体的过程、
活动或机制。碳源量、碳汇量是指在这个过程中的碳量。
第二节 碳排放核算及分析
8
I
P
C
C
碳
排
放
清
单
煤炭开采逃逸
商业/公共事业 
居民与农、林、牧、渔业
能源工业
制造业与建筑业
燃料燃烧活动
能源活动
工业生产过程
炭化钙生产
天然纯碱生产
化学工业 钢铁生产
铁合金生产胺生
产生产
铝生产
镁生产
铅生产
锌生产
金属工业
采掘工业 石灰生产
玻璃生产
水泥生产
农业、林业与其他土地
利用
农业
水稻种植
动物肠道发酵
动物粪便
林业及土地利用变化 前期非林地转有林地吸碳
活立木生长吸碳
活立木消耗导致的碳排放和转移
林地转非林地燃烧腐烂及土壤排碳
废弃物 工业废水处置
城镇生活垃圾处置
生活污水处置
9
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008
碳排放强度（吨 万元） /
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
人均碳排放（吨 人） /
碳排放强度 人均碳排放
江苏省历年碳排放强度和人均碳排放
第二节 碳排放核算及分析
江苏省历年碳排放强度和人均碳排放
10
 单位GDP呈减排态势，但人均排放量进入快速增长期。江
苏省2000年以来碳排放强度呈波动下降趋势，从2000年的0.94
吨/万元下降到2008年的0.75吨/万元，降幅达20%（其中2004
和2005年有所回升，为0.92吨/万元）。这表明总体上江苏省
经济发展速度超过了碳排放的增长速度，说明江苏省近年来的
节能减排工作取得了较好的成效，能源利用效率在逐步提高。
 全省人均碳排放呈逐年增加趋势，从2000年的1.09吨/人
上升到2008年的2.27吨/人，说明随着经济发展和能源消耗量
的大幅增长，总碳排放的迅速增长导致了人均碳排放的增加，
也说明了人均碳污染水平处于上升趋势。
第二节：碳排放核算及分析
11
 特征之一：碳排放总量大、工业主导型 
 根据《江苏省应对气候变化方案》，全省温室气体
排放总量约8.24亿吨CO2当量，占全国7%―8%；
 人均排放2.95吨碳，近乎国际及全国平均水平的2倍。
其中，能源部门和工业过程的排放分别占排放总量
的72.7%和25.1%，农业和废弃物排放比重极小，工
业驱动型的碳排放特征显著。
 随着江苏工业化、现代化、城市化不断发展，能源
需求快速增长，碳排放需求进一步释放，大量产生
碳排放不可避免。
第二节 碳排放核算及分析
12
 特征之二：能源消费以煤为主、“高碳”型 
 江苏是国内能源消费大省，能源消费总量约占全国7%。
江苏省单位GDP能耗低于全国单位GDP能耗平均水平27%，
但能耗总量大。
 明显高于北京、广东、浙江以及上海的水平。能源结构
以煤为主，占全省能源消费的70%，低碳能源资源选择
有限；火电占比80%以上，“高碳”占绝对统治地位。
 由于煤的碳密集程度比其他化石燃料高得多，单位能源
燃煤释放的CO2是天然气的近两倍，以煤炭为主的能源
结构必然会产生较高的排放强度。
第二节 碳排放核算及分析
13
 特征之三：产业结构工业为主、高能耗产业比重大 
 国际通用标准，江苏的三次产业结构中，工业比重
明显过大、结构偏重。
 工业重型化特征明显，冶金、石化、电力、建材等
高物耗、高能耗行业占到整个制造业70%以上，资
源环境和节能减排压力巨大。
 六大高耗能行业规模以上工业企业的能源消耗总量
占全部规模以上工业企业能源消费总量的比重高达
80%。
第二节 碳排放核算及分析
14
 特征之四：科技能力整体技术水平不高、能源资源
利用效率较低 
 
 低碳技术是现代高科技，代表了未来经济的核心竞争
力，但江苏乃至全国的自主创新能力仍不强，以目前
的整体科技水平难以支持低碳经济发展。
 技术效率的贡献偏低，单位产品的能源和资源消耗较
大。。
第二节 碳排放核算及分析
15
 保障发展能力强与引导、保障科学发展能力不够强的矛盾
指标 技术 资本 劳动 能源 
建设用
地 
参数估
计 
-- 0.192 0.590 0.089 0.129 
贡献率 0.059 0.192 0.525 0.095 0.129 
江苏省经济增长全要素分析 劳动要素贡
献高达52.50％；
资金贡献率达
19.20％；建设
用地和能源分别
达12.90％和
8.90％。
第二节 碳排放核算及分析
16
 特征之五：外贸出口加工贸易型、转移性排放程度高 
 
 国际能源机构（IEA）估计，中国国内出口商品生产蕴含的与
能源有关的CO2排放量为16亿吨，占中国排放总量的34%。
 江苏经济外向度较高，出口总额占全国的1/6，实际利用外资
连续6年全国第一，贸易主体以三资企业为主，加工贸易始终
是主要方式。
 “江苏制造”通过产品生产形式，也大量承担了国际制造业
转移的隐含碳排放，并且还承受了欧美市场的贸易保护主义
和环境壁垒的不公正待遇。
第二节 碳排放核算及分析
17
 国家发改委指标：适合经济相对欠发达地区
（从主要指标来看，宿迁达到了申报低碳经济示范
市的要求），且未考虑碳汇能力；
 江苏省自定标准：市、县 / 开发区、CBD区、
旅游区等。如苏州高新区：中心城区-低碳城区;科
技城-碳减排示范区;通浒片区-低碳产业区;湖滨区
-重要碳汇区;横塘片区-低碳体验区。 
第二节 碳排放核算及分析
18
区域 单位产值能耗能耗（吨
标准煤/万元） 
森林覆盖率（%） 
单位经济产出碳
排放指标（t/万
元） 
人均碳排放（t/
人） 
平均家庭碳排放
两（t/户） 
全国 1.102 18.20 0.738 1.170 5.742 
江苏省 0.803 18.10 0.538 1.423 6.586 
南京市 1.178 22.60 0.789 3.197 14.832 
无锡市 0.799 23.12（35.20-城） 0.535 3.415 15.381 
徐州市 1.227 27.70 0.822 1.168 5.941 
常州市 0.934 18.10 0.626 2.573 11.168 
苏州市 0.906 10.90 0.607 4.328 19.403 
南通市 0.730 16.80 0.489 1.077 4.373 
连云港市 0.833 18.00 0.558 0.574 3.019 
淮阴市 0.979 19.80 0.656 0.750 3.727 
盐城市 0.724 18.10 0.485 0.642 2.794 
扬州市 0.739 15.10 0.495 1.135 5.014 
镇江市 0.849 19.70 0.569 1.997 8.004 
泰州市 1.054 14.10 0.706 1.317 5.742 
宿迁市 0.765 23.90 0.513 0.421 2.259 
低碳城市指标体系 
第二节 碳排放核算及分析
19
 完善各类低碳评价指标体系，不仅要具有科学性，还要
具有可操作性、引导性。
 争取话语权，积极探索更为全面的碳排放核算体系，形
成从区域/行业/企业等多层面的碳排放核算清单，并持
续更新，促进符合中国国情的碳排放清单制订。
 结合循环经济发展规划修编，补充低碳经济内容，或专
门编制低碳经济发展规划。
 从碳源、碳汇两个方面全面评估低碳经济发展状况及建
设潜力，尤其是碳减排目标实现的路线图。
 要充分评估已有措施、政策的减排潜力，还要考虑创新
性的机制、做法。
第二节 碳排放核算及分析
1
本章要求：
 理解资源产权的内涵与结构。学会运
用资源产权的相关理论，结合我国的资源
产权状况，分析产权对资源利用的影响，
并进一步掌握基于资源可持续利用的产权
制度特征及未来的改革方向。
第三章：资源产权
2
第一节：产权理论概述
一、起源
 1、产权理论是美国新制度经济学派创立的，
它的渊源可追溯到19世纪末20世纪初的旧制度经
济学派。
3
第一节：产权理论概述
 2、科斯1937年发表的《企业的
性质》和1960年发表的《社会成本
问题》等论文被公认为是西方产权
理论的开山之作；
 3、科斯的追随者如阿尔钦、德
姆塞茨、威廉姆森、张五常等为丰
富和发展产权理论作出了重要贡献。
4
第一节：产权理论概述
二、产权的定义、规则与功能
 1、产权定义
 直观地说，产权就是财产权利。
 不同学者，有着不同的定义：
 （1）德姆塞茨：产权是一种社会工具，其重要性
就在于事实上它们能帮助一个人形成他与其他人进行
交易时的合理预期。
5
 （2）阿尔钦：产权是一个社会所强制实施的选择
一种经济品的使用的权利。
 这一定义抓住了产权的一些本质特征，特别是强
调了产权源于物品的稀缺性及产权的排他性观点。
 （3）菲吕博滕等：产权不是指人与物之间的关系，
而是指由物的存在及关于它们的使用所引起的人们之
间相互认可的行为性关系……它是一系列用来确定每
个人相对于稀缺资源使用时的地位的经济和社会关系。
第一节：产权理论概述
6
 （4）对产权的综合理解
 产权是人们在资源稀缺性条件下使用资源的规则，
这种规则是依靠社会法律、习俗和道德来维护的，产
权具有强制性、排他性；
 产权是一组权利，是对某种经济物品的多种用途
进行选择的权利，而不是一种单项的权利；
 产权是行为权利，产权反映的不是人与物的关系，
而是人们之间一组被相互认可的行为性关系。
第一节：产权理论概述
7
 2、产权规则
 （1）产权界定规则：是指确认财产界定和财产归
属关系的原则和有关的方法、程序等法律规定。
 三条原则：
 一是产权界定必须体现一定所有制形式的性质和
要求；二是产权界定必须以一定的国家政治和法律制
度为依据；三是产权界定必须体现所有权排他性的要
求，不得在产权界定时侵犯所有者合法的财产和财产
收益。
第一节：产权理论概述
8
 （2）产权权益及其补偿规则：是依法对产权体系
中各项权益予以明确划分，调整财产的所有者、经营
者、使用者之间利益关系的原则和规定。
 三条原则：
 一是，财产所有与财产权益相统一的原则；
 二是，产权权能相分离原则；
 三是，财产收益相兼顾原则。
第一节：产权理论概述
9
 （3）产权交易规则：
是保障产权作为商品自由、
公正地转让的原则和法律
规定，必须遵守合法、自
愿、等价原则。
第一节：产权理论概述
10
 3、产权功能
 即产权在社会经济发展过程中所具有的作用：
 （1）财产归属的界定功能：产权确立了产权主体
对财产客体的自主权和营运中合法行动的自由，保证
了产权主体营运的物质条件和利益要求；
 （2）财产营运的规范和约束功能：产权以法权形
式明确了产权主体内部及产权主体之间的权利、利益
和责任；
第一节：产权理论概述
11
 （3）财产利益的激励功能：产权以法权的形式保
障了财产主体合法利益的不可侵犯，规定了财产收益
获取的合法途径，只能是降低交易的社会成本和优化
资源的配置；
 （4）财产转移的交易功能：它强化了财产主体之
间经济联系的市场性、交叉性和渗透性，拓展了财产
营运的空间范围、时间序列和组织结构形式；
 （5）增进（财产）配置效率的功能：即上述四种
功能综合发挥作用的结果。
第一节：产权理论概述
12
三、科斯定理
 科斯定理是现代产权经济学关于产权安排与资
源配置之间关系的思想的集中体现，也是现代产权
经济学基本的、核心的内容。
 1、斯蒂格勒：《价格理论》
 在完全竞争的条件下，
私人成本将等于社会成本。
第一节：产权理论概述
13
 2、对科斯定理的全面表述
 科斯定理应该是由三个定理组成的定理组
 （1）科斯第一定理：如果市场交易费用为零，不
管权利初始安排如何，当事人之间的谈判都会导致那
些财富最大化的安排，即市场机制会自动地驱使人们
谈判，使资源配置实现帕累托最优。
 科斯第一定理能够成立的关键在于假设市场交易
费用为零。
第一节：产权理论概述
14
 （2）科斯第二定理：在交易费用大于零的世界里，
不同的权利界定，会带来不同效率的资源配置。
 也就是说，由于交易是有成本的，在不同的产权
制度下，交易成本不同，从而对资源配置的效率也有
不同影响。
 因此，为了优化资源配置，法律制度对产权的初
始安排和重新安排的选择是重要的。
第一节：产权理论概述
15
 （3）科斯第三定理：由于制度本身的生产不是无
代价的，因此，生产什么制度以及制度的选择，将导
致不同的经济效率。
 如果没有产权的界定、保护、监督等规则，即如
果没有产权制度，产权的交易就难以进行。
 产权制度的供给是人们进行交易，优化资源配置
的前提。不同产权制度下人们从事交易活动的成本不
一样。因此我们要从产权制度的成本和收益比较的角
度，选择合适的产权制度。
第一节：产权理论概述
16
 （4）科斯定理的特点
 第一，科斯研究的是各经济主体在生产中，如何
通过充分自由协商，调整他们的责任和权利，最大限
度地增加社会总产品；
 第二，科斯强调社会总效率的提高，他指出，在
一方给另一方造成损害的争端中，要摆脱谁是谁非的
问题，应从总体的、全社会的角度去分析和研究。
第一节：产权理论概述
17
 第三，科斯认为要解决外部不经济问题，提高经
济效益，可通过产权制度改革，达到产权归属明晰，
使经济当事人得到他本该得到的利益，或免除他不该
承担的费用；
 第四，科斯认为，外部不经济的存在，市场不仅
不会失灵，而且可以通过明晰产权、借助市场交易来
减少外部不经济。
第一节：产权理论概述
1
第二节 资源核算方法
一、资源核算概述
 实物量/价值量核算
 存量/流量核算
 综合/类型核算 
2
第二节 资源核算方法
一、资源核算概述：实物量/价值量核算
 实物量核算：数量核算/质量核算；
 资源价值量核算：通过资源价值评估方
法将资源量通过价值量方式体现。
3
第二节 资源核算方法
一、资源核算概述：存量核算和流量核算
 静态的存量核算可用来评估区域资源总
量与经济总量的关系，并可做区域间的
资源总量的横向比较；
 动态的流量核算有助于分析资源流与经
济流之间的关系。
4
第二节 资源核算方法
一、资源核算概述：综合核算与类型核算
 综合核算只限于价值量核算形式，价值
量使得各类资源得以可比、综合表达。
 类型核算是指对某自然资源类型的单独
核算（如森林、土地、水资源等）。
 
5
第二节 资源核算方法
二、价值核算方法
 市场定价法
 收益还原法
 成本核算法
 净价格法
 偏好评估法
 功能影响估值法
 效益评估法 
6
第二节 资源核算方法
二、价值核算方法：市场定价法
 以自然资源（土地、矿产、森林等）在
市场中的交易价格来直接推算自然资源
的价格。
 适用于资源市场发育健康、运行规范的
情况或有可以比较的市场交易案例。
第二节：资源核算方法
二、价值核算方法：收益还原法
 即将自然资源价格看作是自然资源
使用权年限的年地租或收益的总和。
 
V：自然资源（如土地）的价格 
n：自然资源使用年限
a：平均期望年地租或自然资源年净收益估算值
r：收益还原率，一般采用扣除通货膨胀后的银行存款利率
或者社会投资的平均回报率
第二节：资源核算方法
二、价值核算方法：成本核算法
 评估出生态环境修复成本或弥补资源
环境损失所需的付出。
 生态系统破坏的科学评估,包括潜在性的破坏。
 估算重新营造能产生同等功能、效益的相同生
态系统的经济成本，将重新营造各类被破坏的
生态系统的代价求和。
第二节：资源核算方法
二、价值核算方法：净价格法
 以自然资源市场价格减去自然资源
的开发成本作为自然资源的价格。 
 式中，Vt、St、Ct、Rt和Qt分别表示t期某类自然资
源的存量价值、销售额、开采费用、投资成本的正常回
报和资源开采量。
 该法同时也适用于资源流量的估价。
第二节：资源核算方法
二、价值核算方法：偏好评估法
 通过问卷调查，以人们对资源环境
商品使用或占有支付意愿的方式表达生
态环境商品的价值。
 揭示偏好法可细分为旅行费用法(TCM)、规避行为法
(AB)和防护费用法(DE)、享乐价格法(HPM)；
 声称偏好法中最典型的是意愿调查价值评估法(CV)。
第二节：资源核算方法
二、价值核算方法：影响估值法
 
 评估由于资源环境的变化引致一
些人或群体支付费用增大的影响。
 步骤：实际影响；产出或成本的变化；这
些产出或成本变化的市场价值
 方法：剂量响应法；损失函数法；生产函
数法；人力资本法；替代成本法。
第二节 资源核算方法
二、价值核算方法：功能效益评估法
 将资源环境产品功能的各种效益定
量化，并以各效益价值之和作为总价值。
 
 自然资源所能产生的效益类型包括：①涵养水
源；②保持土壤；③固定二氧化碳和供给氧气；④
游憩价值；⑤生物多样性；⑥庇护地；⑦其他美学、
文化历史价值等。
二、价值核算方法：功能效益评估法
 1997年Robert Costanza等将全球生态
系统类型划分为海洋、森林、草原、湿地、
水面、荒漠、农田、城市等16大类26小类，
将其划分为气候调节、水调控、水土流失
控制、物质循环、污染净化、文化娱乐价
值等17种功能，估算生态系统的功能服务
价值。
第二节 资源核算方法
쫕룥죕웚!!"#$ %#! %#"
ퟷ헟볲뷩!컢뎣퇞!늩쪿짺!훷튪퇐뺿랽쿲캪췁뗘폫쟸폲랢햹)퟊풴뮷뺳뺭볃폫뿉돖탸랢햹"
춨톶ퟷ헟!믆쿍뷰!늩쪿!뷌쫚!늩떼!훷튪퇐뺿랽쿲캪췁뗘퟊풴맜샭"
믹뷰쿮쒿!훐맺쟥뷠랢햹믺훆%7-1'믹뷰퓹뿮쿮쒿#맺볒뿉돖탸랢햹쪵퇩쟸펦뛔웸뫲뇤뮯쓜솦붨짨퇐뺿폫쪾랶$%뇠뫅&#!#$"+&'(뗘랽닺
튵뷡릹뗷헻뗄컂쫒웸쳥복업킧펦뫍뗷뿘퇐뺿---틔붭쯕쪡캪샽%뇠뫅&!"#!"*''"
믹폚 628M075뗄붭쯕쪡닺튵뷡릹뗷헻폫첼복업잱솦럖컶
컢뎣퇞 믆쿍뷰 뒧킡캰 탬맺솼  좽 샮 샶
%쓏뺩듳톧뗘샭폫몣퇳뿆톧톧풺!붭쯕 쓏뺩 !#""$*'
햪튪 쯦ퟅ돇헲뮯폫릤튵뮯뷸돌뗄췆뷸"뺭볃퓶뎤폫뮷뺳톹솦횮볤뗄쎬뛜죕틦볓뻧# 캪쪵쿖뷚쓜복업쒿뇪"퇐뺿틔뗷헻닺튵뷡릹캪
훷튪첼복업슷뺶뗄쟥뷠랢햹믺훆폈캪훘튪폫웈쟐# 붭쯕쪡쫇좫맺릤튵뺭볃듳쪡뫍첼업럅듳쪡횮튻# 틲듋"놾컄틔붭쯕쪡쾸럖탐튵캪
샽"닉폃춶죫닺돶짺쏼훜웚움볛랽램뛔붭쯕쪡닺튵뗄횱뷓뫍볤뷓첼업럅뷸탐닢쯣# 늢릹붨첼복업잱솦쒣탍쒣쓢닺튵뷡릹뗷헻틽웰뗄
복업잱솦# 뷡맻뇭쏷!( 튻듎탔쓜풴쿻럑틽웰뗄횱뷓첼업럅ퟮ듳뗄릱쿗늿쏅쫇뗧솦$죈솦뗄짺닺뫍릩펦튵"햼ퟜ쳥쓜풴쿻럑첼업럅
뗄 '"C'=/"웤듎쫇뮯톧릤튵(3C*'/)"뷰쫴튱솶벰톹퇓볓릤튵쫇뗚죽릱쿗헟(3C&#/)# )듓짺닺솴쫓뷇"볤뷓첼업럅뷏룟뗄늿쏅틀
듎캪!듓뗧솦$죈솦짺닺뫍릩펦튵(#'C#=& Y#"
* A)$쎺첿뾪닉뫍쾴톡튵(=C"33 = Y#"
* A)$쪯폍볓릤$솶붹벰뫋좼쇏볓릤튵($C*3$ $ Y
#"
* A)%쿻럑탨쟳쫓뷇"볤뷓첼업럅훷튪릱쿗살ퟔ폚돶뿚틾몬첼업럅%듓늿쏅닣듎살뾴"춨탅짨놸$볆쯣믺벰벰웤쯻뗧ퟓ짨놸훆퓬튵
(#*C''/)$뷰쫴튱솶벰톹퇓볓릤튵(#!C*'/)$붻춨퓋쫤짨놸훆퓬튵(#!C$3/)퓚돶뿚첼업럅훐릱쿗뷏듳# *붭쯕쪡첼복업잱솦뷏
듳뗄늿쏅훷튪쫇쓜풴쏜벯탍탐튵# 죧닺횵뇤뚯 #/"뗧솦$죈솦짺닺릩펦튵복업킧펦듯 #C'= AX#"
$ 풪"첼복업솿햼 !"#" 쓪첼업럅
#C'+/# 틲듋"붨틩붭쯕쪡돽쇋쪹폃럛쎺좼징벼쫵(.77)$헻쳥쎺웸뮯솪뫏톭뮷(2,77)$듳탍톭뮷쇷뮯뒲(74^)뗈쿈뷸벼쫵쳡룟쓜
풴샻폃잿뛈틔췢"뾪랢샻폃뿉퓙짺쓜풴뫍탂쓜풴살폅뮯쓜풴뷡릹# 쇭췢"훘뗣쳡짽뻟폐뷏듳복업잱솦늿쏅뗄닺횵"샽죧춨탅짨놸$볆
쯣믺벰웤쯻뗧ퟓ짨놸훆퓬튵$춨폃$힨폃짨놸훆퓬튵#
맘볼듊 628M075%첼업럅%닺튵뷡릹뗷헻%복업잱솦%붭쯕쪡
훐춼럖샠뫅 4"*!C# 컄쿗뇪쪶싫 5 컄헂뇠뫅 !""# $#!"%(#"!&)"% $""%- $". )*+!!",-./.01,+223,!""# $#!"%,#"!&,"%,""/
ퟔ듓 !""* 쓪훐맺돉캪뗚튻듳첼업럅맺!뻍쏦쇙퇏뻾
뗄맺볊첼복업톹솦*#+
" 복업컊쳢쫇맺볊웸뫲킭틩뗄뫋탄
컊쳢!듓쒳훖뷇뛈뾴!캴살맺볊웸뫲킭틩!쪵훊뻍쫇좫쟲킭
춬복업뗄훆뛈낲업*!+
" 퓚 !"## 쓪뗂냠웸뫲듳믡짏훐맺쏷
좷돐억붫실쪵복업탐뚯!늢퓚#쪮뛾컥$ 맦뮮훐헫뛔뷚쓜
복업훆뚨쇋쿪쾸쒿뇪!떽 !"#' 쓪쪵쿖떥캻 ,-.뛾퇵뮯첼
업럅쿂붵 #+/뗄쒿뇪" 뛸붭쯕쪡ퟷ캪훐맺뺭볃ퟮ랢듯쪡
럝횮튻!퓚웤#쪮뛾컥$ 맦뮮훐튲ퟶ돶뷚쓜복업돐억!벴
!"#' 쓪떥캻 ,-.쓜뫄쿂붵 #=/뗄쒿뇪" 캪쪵쿖#쪮뛾
컥$복업쒿뇪!붭쯕쪡닉좡듫쪩돽쇋췆뷸뷚쓜붵뫄)랢햹뗍
첼뺭볃횮췢!쫗튪죎컱쫇볓뿬힪뇤뺭볃랢햹랽쪽!듙뷸닺
튵뷡릹짽벶" 틲듋!탨튪뛔떱잰룷탐튵첼업럅솿틔벰첼복
업잱솦ퟶ돶헽좷맀쯣"
# 컄쿗ퟛ쫶
첼업럅잿뛈폫닺튵뷡릹퇝뮯횮볤듦퓚떹#h$ퟖ탎쟺
쿟맘쾵" 랢햹쒣쪽힪뇤뫍닺튵뷡릹뗷헻좡뗃쪵훊탔돉킧
쫇쪵쿖 !"!" 쓪복업쒿뇪뗄잰쳡*&+
" 춨맽뛔떱잰닺튵뷡릹
놳뺰쿂첼업럅뫋쯣쫇쪵쿖뗍첼뮯닺튵뷡릹뗷헻뗄잰쳡"
쒿잰첼업럅뫋쯣폐솽훖&튻랽쏦쫇틔짺닺헟쫓뷇뗄첼업럅
쟥떥뫋쯣뿲볜캪훷" 듋랽램훷튪쫇샻폃 2.77뫋쯣쳥쾵!
헫뛔탐헾쟸뇟뷧쓚늿뗄룷늿쏅뗄맀쯣횱뷓첼업럅*$ %*+
"
뺩뚼틩뚨쫩내헕듋샠뫋쯣뇪ힼ!훆뚨맺볊첼복업퓰죎!떫
헢훖랽램뷶볆쯣맺볒탐헾쟸쓚뗄첼업럅!뫶싔쇋맺볊볤첼
힪틆뫍뺭볃늿쏅볤뢴퓓뗄릩펦붻듭쿖쿳!뛔첼복업퓰죎폐
쪧릫욽*+ %3+
" 쇭튻랽쏦!쿻럑헟뢺퓰쫓뷇뗄첼업럅퇐뺿뗃
떽풽살풽맣랺맘힢!폈웤퓚퇐뺿맺볊쎳틗훐뗄첼킹슶컊쳢
퓋폃뷏캪웕뇩*#" %#&+
" 춶죫닺돶럖컶랽램붫짺닺헟쫓뷇폫
쿻럑헟쫓뷇쓉죫춬튻뫋쯣뿲볜쿂!ힷퟙ헻룶뺭볃쾵춳뗄횱
뷓뫍볤뷓첼업럅!믹폚듋쳡돶쇋첼ퟣ벣룅쓮*#$+
" 틑폐톧
헟퓋폃첼ퟣ벣퇐뺿쇋훐맺*#' %#++
)쏀맺*#=+
)냄듳샻퇇*#3+
)쾤
,$&,
훐맺죋뿚*퟊풴폫뮷뺳 !"#' 쓪 뗚!' 뻭 뗚$ 웚 456789:9;<8=6:7">?@:;>4?@87A?7B6>:7C?7= B*D,!' 7*,$ !"#'
网络出版时间：2015-04-07 15:20
网络出版地址：http://www.cnki.net/kcms/detail/37.1196.N.20150407.1520.023.html
쓡*!"+뗈맺볒뗄맺볊쎳틗뗄틾몬첼컊쳢"
쒿잰뻍닺튵뷡릹뗷헻폫첼업럅볤뗄퇐뺿!훷튪폐솽랽
쏦뗄퇐뺿돉맻" 튻랽쏦샻폃뷡릹럖뷢랽램럖컶닺튵뷡릹
뗄뇤뚯뛔ퟜ쳥첼업럅뗄펰쿬" 헅췺뗈샻폃 01-2럖뷢벼
쫵퇐뺿쇋놱뺩쓜풴쿻럑업럅 78! 퓶솿퓶뎤뗄쟽뚯틲쯘!죏
캪닺튵뷡릹뗷헻뫍쓜뫄뷡릹뇤뮯뛔닺튵첼업럅뇤뚯펰쿬
뷏뗍*!#+
" 탬돉쇺뗈닉폃춬퇹뗄랽램뛔즽뚫쪡닺튵뷡릹뗷
헻뛔첼업럅뗄펰쿬뷸탐럖컶!늢뷸탐풤닢*!!+
" 쯻죏캪릤
튵뇈훘쿂붵튻룶냙럖뗣쯹뛔펦뗄 78! 업럅솿복짙 +=C* Y
#"
$ %=&C+ Y#"
$ A" 쇭튻랽쏦!춨맽쒿뇪풼쫸살뗷헻닺튵뷡
릹!쪵쿖뛔첼업럅솿뗄풼쫸" 풭틣뻼뗈믹폚 ,K5.M6쒣탍
럖뇰듓뺭볃퓶뎤)뷚쓜복업)닺튵뷡릹ퟮ폅죽훖닺튵뷡릹
뗷헻쒿뇪살럖컶뛔뛾퇵뮯첼업럅솿퓬돉뗄펰쿬!죏캪헾뢮
펦떱돶첨ퟛ뫏탔헾닟살쪵쿖닺튵뷡릹폅뮯폫첼업럅솿붵
뗍*!&+
" 얣뫨샙뗈붨솢춶죫닺돶뛠쒿뇪폅뮯쒣탍!뷨훺뛠
쒿뇪틅뒫쯣램쿪쾸닢쯣쇋훐맺닺튵뷡릹뗷헻뗄첼업럅킧
펦" 떫쫇!틔췹퇐뺿뚼쫇붫닺튵뷡릹뗷헻ퟷ캪헾닟듫쪩!
뫪맛럖컶웤뇤뮯듸살뗄첼업럅킧펦!쎻폐짦벰캢맛뗄뻟쳥
탐튵죧뫎뗷헻뗄컊쳢*!$+
"
붫뺭볃춶죫닺돶쒣탍폫짺쏼훜웚샭싛뷡뫏뗄랽램벴뺭
볃춶죫닺돶짺쏼훜웚움볛%628M075'쫇첼ퟣ벣뫋쯣뿲볜쿂
럖컶볆쯣캢맛늿쏅짺닺좫맽돌틾몬첼업럅뗄폐킧랽램횮
튻!튲쫇듓캢맛쫓뷇퇐뺿닺튵죧뫎뷸탐뫏샭뗷헻뗄뿆톧쫖
뛎" GRH9<>L R<FF9;;샻폃뺭볃춶죫닺돶짺쏼훜웚움볛죭볾
볆쯣쇋쏀맺돶뿚떽훐맺뗄틾몬첼업럅솿*!'+
!맺쓚톧헟쳆붨
죙뗈퓋폃 628M075랽램뛔붭헣뮦뗘쟸틾몬첼업럅뷸탐맀
쯣!늢럖컶웤뗘쟸닮틬*!*+
" 뛸퓋폃 628M075랽램듓늿쏅닣
듎뾪햹틾몬첼뗄퇐뺿퓚맺쓚뮹뷏캪놡죵*!+ %!3+
" 본폚듋!놾
컄뛔붭쯕쪡룷탐튵늿쏅듓짺닺떽릩펦솴퓙떽쿻럑뮷뷚뗄틾
몬첼뷸탐럖컶!퓚듋믹뒡횮짏첽쳖닺튵뷡릹뗷헻뗄첼복업
잱솦!캪붭쯕쪡뿆톧훆뚨복복업헾닟쳡릩샭싛닎뾼"
! 쫽뻝살풴폫퇐뺿랽램
쒿잰훷튪뗄쓜풴폐뮯쪯쓜풴)짺컯훊쓜)첫퇴쓜)뫋쓜)
럧쓜)뗧쓜뗈" 뾼싇떽떱잰붭쯕쪡뗄첼업럅훷튪풴폚튻듎
탔쓜풴뗄쿻럑쯹훂" 틲듋!놾컄뷶틔쎺)쪯폍)쳬좻웸뗈튻
듎탔쓜풴볆쯣웤첼업럅" 퇐뺿닉폃 !"#" 쓪붭쯕쪡춳볆쫽
뻝!웤훐!룷훖쓜풴쿻럑쫽뻝살ퟔ폚.훐맺쓜풴춳볆쓪본/붭
쯕쪡쓜풴욽뫢뇭" 늿쏅춶죫닺돶쫽뻝살ퟔ폚 !"#" 쓪붭쯕
쪡춶죫닺돶퇓뎤뇭" 놾컄닉폃 $! 늿쏅춶죫닺돶뇭!늢뷡뫏
쓜풴욽뫢뇭!뗷헻뫏늢ퟮ뫳좷뚨캪 !3 룶늿쏅%볻뇭 #'"
믹폚쓜풴쿻럑뗄첼업럅볆쯣닉폃 2.77췆볶볆쯣랽
램!웤훐뗄첼업럅틲ퟓ닉폃맺볒뿆캯웸뫲뇤뮯쿮쒿%쎺
"C+!*!쪯폍 "C'=&!쳬좻웸 "C$"3'" 돽듋횮췢!놾컄샻폃
뺭볃춶죫닺돶쒣탍폫짺쏼훜웚샭싛쒣탍쿠뷡뫏!볆쯣쇋닺
튵짺닺솴맽돌뗄틾몬첼업럅!늢릹붨첼복업잱솦풤닢쒣
탍"
!C# 628M075쒣탍
VV>%4%;K
'
%#:K
%#'
쪽훐&^캪룷늿쏅뗄쓜풴쿻럑 78! 업럅뻘헳![9e캪 ^
훐풪쯘%9캪닺욷짺닺믲럾컱쳡릩늿쏅뗄탲뫅!e캪닺욷믲
럾컱늿쏅뗄탲뫅!9V#!4>!eV#!4!C>!> 캪춶죫닺돶뇭
훐뗄늿쏅쫽'(^뗄룷탐쿲솿횮뫍뇭쪾늿쏅 9퓚닺욷짺닺
믲럾컱맽돌훐횮볤첼업럅솿!쇐쿲솿횮뫍뇭쪾늿쏅 e퓚짺
닺훐틲쪹폃늿쏅 9뗄닺욷믲럾컱닺짺뗄틾몬첼업럅(T캪
뛔뷇뻘헳!뇭쪾룷룶늿쏅뗄횱뷓쓜풴쿻럑첼업럅잿뛈!뛔
뷇풪쯘캪 >"(%4%;K
'
%#캪쇐낺쳨럲쓦뻘헳!랴펳쇋뺭볃뗄
훐볤춶죫닺돶뷡릹틔벰짺닺벼쫵쮮욽!웤훐 2캪떥캻뻘
헳!;K 캪맺쓚춶죫늿럖뗄횱뷓쿻뫄쾵쫽뻘헳!닉폃#뇈샽
뗈춬램$뗃떽*++
(<9e캪 5뗄풪쯘!뇭쪾뗚 e룶늿쏅퓶볓튻룶
떥캻뗄ퟮ훕탨쟳쪱쯹탨튪뗄 9늿쏅뗄닺돶" 놾컄훐틔
!"#" 쓪붭쯕쪡럇뺺헹춶죫닺돶뇭훐 e늿쏅뛔 9늿쏅닺욷
믲럾컱뗄횱뷓쿻뫄쾵쫽(:K 캪뛔뷇뻘헳!쳞돽뷸뿚늿럖뗄
ퟮ훕탨쟳솿!뛔뷇풪쯘 Ne뇭쪾 e늿쏅닺욷믲럾컱뗄ퟮ훕탨
쟳솿%냼삨뻓쏱ퟮ훕쿻럑솿)헾뢮ퟮ훕탨쟳솿)퟊놾탎돉폫
돶뿚솿'"
뇭 # 붭쯕쪡탐튵늿쏅맩샠
K<[C# 7B<;;9J9Q<A9I> 9>LH;AF9<B;@QAIF;IJe9<>?;H DFI:9>Q@
뇠싫
7IL@
쏻돆
c<O@
뇠싫
7IL@
쏻돆
c<O@
< 얩쇖쓁폦튵 D 춨폃)힨폃짨놸훆퓬튵
[ 쎺첿뾪닉뫍쾴톡튵 d 붻춨퓋쫤짨놸훆퓬튵
Q 쪯폍뫍쳬좻웸뾪닉튵 F 뗧웸믺킵벰웷닄훆퓬튵
L 뷰쫴닉뿳톡튵 ;
춨탅짨놸)볆쯣믺벰웤쯻
뗧ퟓ짨놸훆퓬튵
@
럇뷰쫴뿳벰웤쯻뿳닉톡
튵
A
틇웷틇뇭벰컄뮯냬릫폃
믺킵훆퓬튵
J 쪳욷훆퓬벰퇌닝볓릤튵 H 릤틕욷벰웤쯻훆퓬튵
? 럄횯튵 : 럏욷럏쇏
R
럄횯럾ힰ킬쎱욤룯폰죞
벰웤훆욷튵
]
뗧솦)죈솦뗄짺닺뫍릩펦
튵
9 쒾닄볓릤벰볒뻟훆퓬튵 W 좼웸짺닺뫍릩펦튵
e
퓬횽펡쮢벰컄뷌쳥폽폃
욷훆퓬튵
E 쮮뗄짺닺뫍릩펦튵
f
쪯폍볓릤)솶붹벰뫋좼
쇏볓릤튵
S 붨훾튵
B 뮯톧릤튵 << 붻춨퓋쫤)닖뒢벰폊헾튵
O 럇뷰쫴뿳컯훆욷튵 <[ 엺랢쇣쫛뫍힡쯞닍틻튵
> 뷰쫴튱솶벰톹퇓볓릤튵 <Q 웤쯻
I 뷰쫴훆욷튵
,$$,
훐맺죋뿚*퟊풴폫뮷뺳 !"#' 쓪 뗚 $ 웚
!C! 첼복업잱솦쒣탍
춶죫닺돶쒣탍랴펳쇋늿쏅횮볤뗄뢴퓓뺭볃솪쾵!틲
듋!떱튻룶늿쏅뗄닺횵랢짺뇤뮯쪱튲믡펰쿬쿠맘뗄웤폠닺
튵닺횵랢짺뇤뮯" 틔뒫춳춶죫닺돶쒣탍캪믹뒡!첼복업잱
솦쒣탍릹붨쪱뾼싇닺횵뗄횱뷓뇤뮯뫍볤뷓뇤뮯듸살뗄첼
복업킧펦"
*HK
&V&&HK
&Z!
8
"V#
D"&HK
&&& %!'
쪽훐 *HK
&뇭쪾 &늿쏅뗄닺횵뇤뮯폫 &늿쏅뇤뮯틽웰뗄
웤폠늿쏅뗄뇤뮯ퟜ뫍(&&볙짨쫇닺횵뇤뮯싊(HK
& 뇭쪾 &늿
쏅뗄업돽뷸뿚쿮뫳뗄맺쓚닺횵!D"&뇭쪾 &탐튵캪닺돶떥캻
닺욷탨튪 "탐튵춶죫뗄횱뷓뫍볤뷓춶죫"
*!V>K
&&&HK
&Z!
8
"V#
>K
"D"&HK
&&& %&'
쪽훐 *!뇭쪾평폚닺횵뇤뮯틽웰뗄횱뷓첼업럅폫볤
뷓첼업럅ퟜ뫍!>K
&뇭쪾 &늿쏅쓜풴쿻럑떥캻닺횵첼업럅!
웤폠몬틥춬%!'
!>$V
*!
*HK
&
V
>K
&&&HK
&Z!
8
"V#
>K
"D"&HK
&&&
&&HK
&Z!
8
"V#
D"&HK
&&&
V
>K
&Z!
8
"V#
>K
"D"&
# Z!
8
"V#
D"&
%$'
웤훐 7T6뇭쪾첼복업킧펦
;!>V&HK
&%>K
&Z!
8
"V#
>K
"D"&' %''
웤훐 57T뇭쪾첼복업ퟜ솿!&퓚놾컄훐볙짨캪 #/!
뇭쪾쒳튻탐튵닺횵뇤뚯 #/!틽웰뗄웤폠탐튵첼업럅뇤
뮯"
& 퇐뺿뷡맻
&C# 믹폚쓜풴쿻럑뗄횱뷓첼업럅볆쯣
춨맽 2.77뫋쯣랽램!뛔붭쯕쪡쾸럖탐튵튻듎탔쓜풴
쿻럑틽웰뗄횱뷓첼업럅뷸탐맀쯣" 살ퟔ폚쓜풴쿻럑첼업
럅ퟜ솿캪 !"&C#! Y#"
* A!웤훐늿쏅 ]%뗧솦)죈솦뗄짺닺뫍
릩펦튵'쫇ퟮ듳뗄업럅늿쏅!캪ퟜ쳥첼업럅릱쿗 '"C'=/
%#"!C+$ Y#"
* A'" !"#" 쓪 붭 쯕 쪡 떥 캻 ,-.쓜 뫄 캪
"n+&$!죧맻튪쪵쿖퓚#쪮뛾컥$뷚쓜복업맦뮮훐떥캻 ,-.
쓜뫄쿂붵 #=/뗄쒿뇪!듓횱뷓첼업럅살뾴!뗧솦탐튵쫇첼
복업잱솦ퟮ듳ퟮ맘볼뗄늿쏅" 평폚듳솿뗄뮯톧릤튵닺욷
짺닺!늿쏅 B%뮯톧릤튵' 쫇쓜풴쿻럑첼업럅뗄뗚뛾릱쿗
헟!햼ퟜ쳥첼업럅뗄 3n*'/%!" Y#"
* A'!늿쏅 > 쫇뗚죽릱
쿗헟!첼업럅솿캪 #=n3! Y#"
* A!햼ퟜ쳥첼업럅뗄 3n&#/"
떫쫇!듓춼 # 뿉틔뾴돶횱뷓첼업럅잿뛈폫첼업럅ퟜ솿횮볤
늻돉헽뇈" 쎺첿뾪닉쾴톡튵ퟔ짭쓜풴쿻럑첼업럅솿뷏뗍!
떫쫇웤뻟폐ퟮ룟뗄횱뷓첼업럅잿뛈 'n"$* 3!웤듎쫇뗧솦
죈솦짺닺릩펦튵횱뷓첼잿뛈 !n3'* =!쪯폍볓릤솶붹)벰뫋
좼쇏튵"n3!# 3%볻뇭 !'" 첼업럅잿뛈룟뗄늿쏅뻹쫇믹뒡
탔쓜풴늿쏅!헢폫헻룶훐맺틔쎺첿쓜풴캪훷튪짺닺쾵춳뗄
쓜풴샻폃뷡릹폐맘쾵!붵뗍쓜풴쿻럑틽웰뗄첼업럅솿탨튪
뗷헻쓜풴샻폃뷡릹!듳솦랢햹쟥뷠쓜풴뫍탂쓜풴!샽죧뗘
죈쓜)뎱쾫쓜)첫퇴쓜뗈" 쓜풴쿻뫄틽웰뗄첼업럅늻쓜릻
랴펳짺닺늿쏅횮볤뗄첼업럅럖엤쟩뿶!틲듋!훐볤짺닺폫
럾컱틽웰뗄퓚룷룶늿쏅뗄첼업럅늻죝뫶쫓"
&C! 짺닺솴쫓뷇뗄틾몬첼업럅볆쯣
닉폃춶죫닺돶좫짺쏼훜웚움볛랽램듓짺닺쫓뷇럖컶
살뾴!볤뷓뗄첼업럅캪 &=n$&" # Y#"
* A!틔짺닺ퟜ쳥첼업
럅솿뷸탐업탲!업쏻잰 & 뗄늿쏅뇰럖쫇뗧솦)죈솦짺닺뫍
릩펦튵%늿쏅 ]!#'n#=& Y#"
* A')쎺첿뾪닉뫍쾴톡튵%늿쏅
[!=n"33 = Y#"
* A')쪯폍볓릤)솶붹벰뫋좼쇏볓릤튵%늿쏅
f!$n*3$ $ Y#"
* A')럖뇰햼ퟜ쳥첼업럅뗄&3n'#/)!#n"=/
뇭 ! 붭쯕쪡쾸럖늿쏅횱뷓뫍볤뷓첼업럅잿뛈(AX췲풪)
K<[C! -9F@QA<>L 9>L9F@QAQ<F[I> 9>A@>;9AEIJL@A<9B@L 9>LH;AF9@;9> e9<>?;H DFI:9>Q@%AX#"
$ EH<>'
뇠뫅
7IL@
횱뷓첼잿뛈
-9F@QAQ<F[I>
9>A@>;9AE
볤뷓첼잿뛈
2>L9F@QAQ<F[I>
9>A@>;9AE
뇠뫅
7IL@
횱뷓첼잿뛈
-9F@QAQ<F[I>
9>A@>;9AE
볤뷓첼잿뛈
2>L9F@QAQ<F[I>
9>A@>;9AE
뇠뫅
7IL@
횱뷓첼잿뛈
-9F@QAQ<F[I>
9>A@>;9AE
볤뷓첼잿뛈
2>L9F@QAQ<F[I>
9>A@>;9AE
< "C"&$ & "C!&$ * f "C3!# 3 #C#3# # H "C""3 # "C$3! '
[ 'C"$* 3 'C+33 ' B "C#$* 3 "C3$" " : "C"** # "C$$' !
Q "C#"! & "C&#! ! O "C!*+ ' #C!'' + ] !C3'* = 'C&#' '
L "C"#& $ "C='3 * > "C#=3 ! "C3*" = W "C"&+ 3 "C&#" #
@ "C&'+ + #C#$' # I "C"!$ # "C+$+ = E "C""+ $ "C$'! '
J "C"&3 = "C!== & D "C"#" + "C'+$ ! S "C""= " "C*&3 &
? "C"'= ' "C'"* " d "C""! 3 "C$** " << "C#&* = "C$+# 3
R "C"!# # "C&+3 ' F "C""= $ "C'3" ! <[ "C""$ " "C#'$ $
9 "C"*+ + "C'&+ = ; "C""" 3 "C&"& ' <Q "C"#' ' "C!#" +
e "C#3& + "C*33 & A "C""! ! "C&+' $
,$',
컢뎣퇞뗈!믹폚 628M075뗄붭쯕쪡닺튵뷡릹뗷헻폫첼복업잱솦럖컶
춼 # 쾸럖늿쏅횱뷓첼업럅폫첼업럅잿뛈
49?C# -9F@QAQ<F[I> @O9;;9I>;<>L Q<F[I> 9>A@>;9AE
IJL@A<9B@L ;@QAIF;
춼 ! 짺닺릩펦솴쫓뷇뗄첼업럅ퟜ솿
49?C! 5OIH>AIJQ<F[I> @O9;;9I>;JFIODFILHQA9I>
<>L ;HDDBEQR<9> D@F;D@QA9:@
뫍 #!C!!/%볻춼 !'" 헢벸룶늿쏅뻹뒦폚짺닺솴짏폎뗄쓜
풴릩펦늿쏅!캪웤폠쿂폎늿쏅뗄짺닺쳡릩쓜풴살풴!폫웤
폠닺튵솪쾵쏜쟐!틲듋!훆뚨복업죎컱쪱늻뷶튪뾼싇늿쏅
ퟔ짭뗄첼업럅!뛸쟒ퟛ뫏뾼싇웤볤뷓뗄캪웤폠늿쏅힪틆업
럅뗄첼업럅" 듓헻룶짺닺솴뗄첼샛믽킧펦살뾴!럄횯튵
%늿쏅 ?')럾ힰ짺닺훆퓬튵%늿쏅 R')릤틕욷훆퓬튵%늿쏅
H'뗈늿쏅틲뒦폚닺튵솴짏폎!첼업럅퓚ퟜ쳥첼업럅훐햼뷏
뗍뇈샽" 틲듋!틀뻝룷탐튵닺횵뛔뺭볃퓶뎤릱쿗돌뛈!쳔
청실뫳뗄룟컛좾룟업럅탐튵!쳡룟짺닺솴횮볤뛔뷓벼쫵!
붵뗍짺닺맽돌쓜풴쿻뫄첼업럅" 쇭췢!뷰쫴튱솶벰톹퇓튵
%늿쏅 >')뮯톧릤튵%늿쏅 B' 뗄첼업럅튲뷏룟!럖뇰캪
&'$n+$ Y#"
$ A뫍 &&=n"' Y#"
$ A!럖뇰햼ퟜ쳥첼업럅뗄
3n!&/뫍=n=/" 폫뗧솦)쎺첿)쪯폍탐튵쿠뇈!쯤좻뛔ퟜ
쳥첼업럅뗄릱쿗뷏킡!떫쫇폫웤폠뗄쿂폎짺닺솴늿쏅쿠
뇈!첼업럅튲쫇릱쿗뷏듳뗄늿쏅" 퓚놣횤붭쯕쪡뺭볃욽컈
퓶뎤뗄춬쪱!쿞훆닺쓜맽쪣탐튵랢햹맦쒣!힪뇤뺭볃퓶뎤
랽쪽!듙뷸닺튵뷡릹짽벶"
뗧솦)죈솦짺닺릤튵릩펦튵뗄튻듎탔쓜풴쿻럑횱뷓첼
업럅뫍볤뷓첼업럅뚼풶룟폚웤폠늿쏅!헢폫웤폠늿쏅뗄쓜
풴탨쟳폐맘" 틲듋!뛔뗧솦)죈솦늿쏅뗄ퟜ쳥첼업럅뷸탐
첼업럅살풴럖뷢%볻춼 &'" 춨탅짨놸)볆쯣믺벰웤쯻뗧ퟓ
짨놸훆퓬튵%늿쏅 ;!3&$C#3 Y#"
$ A'뛔뗧솦늿쏅뗄첼업럅
릱쿗ퟮ듳!햼뗧솦늿쏅첼업럅ퟜ솿뗄*#C'&/(웤듎쫇뮯톧
릤튵 % 늿쏅 B! #3&C* Y#"
$ A' 뛔뗧솦늿쏅 첼 업 럅 릱 쿗
#!C+'/!춨폃힨폃짨놸훆퓬튵%늿쏅 D')뗧ퟓ믺킵벰웷닄
훆퓬튵% 늿쏅 F' 뗄릱쿗튲늻죝뫶쫓!럖뇰햼 +C#&/ 뫍
*C&/" 붭쯕쪡뷚쓜맦뮮튪쟳떽 !"#' 쓪!좫쪡맦쒣틔짏릤
튵떥캻퓶볓횵쓜뫄뇈 !"#" 쓪쿂붵 !"/틔짏" 틲듋!뛔폚
뗧솦탐튵뛸퇔!늻뷶뻍뗧솦탐튵놾짭랢햹룟닎쫽)듳죝솿
좼쎺믺ퟩ뫍쳬좻웸좼웸-헴웻솪뫏톭뮷랢뗧믺ퟩ살붵뗍
쓜풴쿻뫄첼업럅(뛸쟒헫뛔첼업럅릱쿗뷏듳뗄늿쏅짨훃복
업볆뮮!쳡룟볆쯣믺훆퓬튵벰웤뗧ퟓ믺킵훆퓬튵뗄짺닺벼
쫵!뮯톧릤튵볌탸췆맣솶폍)틒쾩짺닺뷚쓜릤틕벼쫵!췆뷸
듳탍솶뮯웳튵쓜풴훐탄붨짨!볓잿폠죈폠톹믘쫕샻폃" 럄
횯튵%늿쏅 ?')틇뇭틇웷훆퓬튵%늿쏅 A'쯤좻릱쿗늻쿔훸!
떫쫇퓚짺닺솴훐냧퇝쇋훘튪뷇즫!튪복뗍헻쳥릤튵늿쏅뗄
첼업럅!탨튪뛔짺닺솴짏뗄룷룶늿쏅뚼쪵쪩복업듫쪩!닅
쓜듯떽복업쒿뇪"
춼 & 뗧솦$죈솦짺닺폫릩펦튵첼업럅럖뷢
49?C& 7IODI;9A9I>;IJL9F@QAQ<F[I> @O9;;9I>;JFIO
@B@QAF9QR@<ADI]@F;@QAIF
&C& 쿻럑탨쟳쫓뷇뗄틾몬첼업럅볆쯣
평폚늿쏅 e퓚짺닺맽돌훐믡샻폃웤폠늿쏅뗄닺욷믲
럾컱!뛸늿쏅 e튲쫇틲캪늻춬뗄쿻럑탨쟳듌벤웤짺닺뛸캪
웤럾컱" 쯹틔룃늿쏅틲캪ퟮ훕탨쟳틽웰뗄첼업럅폫룃늿
쏅횱뷓폐맘쾵!춬쪱튲폫웤폠쿠맘늿쏅폐맘" 놾컄듓뻓쏱
쿻럑탨쟳)헾뢮쿻럑탨쟳)퟊놾탎돉)돶뿚탨쟳뗈랽쏦뛔붭
쯕쪡탨쟳쫓뷇뗄첼업럅뷸탐맀쯣" !"#" 쓪붭쯕쪡룷늿쏅
ퟮ훕탨쟳틽웰뗄ퟜ쳥첼업럅캪 **C$+ Y#"
* A!죧춼 $ 쯹쪾!
웤훐돶뿚틾몬첼퓚룷룶늿쏅쿻럑첼업럅훐쯹햼뇈샽뚼뷏
듳!햼ퟜ쳥첼업럅뗄 3"C*!/!웤훐럄횯튵%늿쏅 ?')춨탅
짨놸훆퓬튵%늿쏅 ;'뗈늿쏅쫇틽웰돶뿚첼업럅뛔ퟜ쳥첼
업럅뗄릱쿗ퟮ듳늿쏅" ퟊놾탎돉틽웰뗄첼업럅캪 $C# Y
#"
* A!햼탨쟳첼업럅뗄 *C#+/!늿쏅 D%춨폃)힨폃짨놸훆
,$*,
훐맺죋뿚*퟊풴폫뮷뺳 !"#' 쓪 뗚 $ 웚
퓬튵')늿쏅 F%뗧웸믺킵벰웷닄훆퓬튵')늿쏅 ;%춨탅짨
놸)볆쯣믺벰웤쯻뗧ퟓ짨놸훆퓬튵'쫇퟊놾탎돉틽웰첼업
럅훐뷏캪쿔훸뗄늿쏅" 쇭췢!뻓쏱쿻럑뫍헾뢮쿻럑틽웰뗄
첼업럅럖뇰햼ퟜ쳥틾몬첼뗄 !C3*/뫍 "C&/!쯦ퟅ붭쯕쪡
뛔췢뾪럅돌뛈뗄볓짮!뛔췢쎳틗돉캪뺭볃퓶뎤뗄훷튪릱쿗
헟!뇘틽웰룼뛠뗄첼업럅"
춼 $ ퟮ훕쿻럑틽웰뗄 !3 룶늿쏅틾몬첼업럅
49?C$ 6O[IL9@L 78! @O9;;9I>;<>L Q<F[I> 9>A@>;9AE
F@;HBAJFIOJ9><BL@O<>L 9> !3 ;@QAIF;
듓룷룶늿쏅뛔ퟜ쳥틾몬첼릱쿗살뾴!춨탅짨놸)볆쯣
믺벰웤쯻뗧ퟓ짨놸훆퓬튵%늿쏅 ;'틾몬첼업럅듯 !=C3+ Y
#"
* A!햼ퟜ쳥틾몬첼뗄 $&C'=/!웤듎쫇뷰쫴튱솶벰톹퇓볓
릤튵%늿쏅 >'틾몬첼업럅캪틾몬첼릱쿗 ##C$*/%+C*! Y
#"
* A'!붻춨퓋쫤짨놸훆퓬튵%늿쏅 d'뫍럄횯튵%늿쏅 ?'뛔
틾몬첼릱쿗럖뇰캪 ##C&#/뫍 ##C"*/" 떫쫇헢벸룶늿쏅
뗄볤뷓첼업럅잿뛈랴뛸뷏뗍%볻춼 $'!쎺첿뾪닉쾴톡튵뫍
뗧솦)죈솦릩펦튵뗄볤뷓첼업럅ퟜ솿폫볤뷓첼업럅잿뛈튲
늻돉뇈샽!듓뇭 ! 훐뾴떽!볤뷓첼업럅잿뛈뗚튻뗄쫇쎺첿
뾪닉쾴톡튵%'C+33 ''!웤듎쫇뗧솦)죈솦짺닺릩펦튵볤뷓
첼잿뛈캪 'C&#' '!럇뷰쫴뿳컯훆욷튵뗄볤뷓첼업럅업쏻
떽 #$!떫쫇웤볤뷓첼업럅잿뛈캪 #C!'' +!업쏻뗚죽" 쮵쏷
닺튵뷡릹뗄뗷헻늻뷶좡뻶폚닺튵ퟔ짭뗄뺭볃닺돶폫첼업
럅!튲튪뾼싇룃늿쏅틽웰뗄볤뷓뺭볃킧펦뫍볤뷓첼업럅"
샽죧붭쯕쪡냩쯦ퟅ돇쫐뮯늻뛏췆뷸!돇쫐붨훾쏦믽늻뛏삩
헅!탨튪뗄쮮쓠짺닺튲믡퓶볓!헢늻뷶쪹뗃럇뷰쫴훆퓬튵
뗄첼업럅퓶볓!붨훾튵첼업럅튲믡퓶뎤" 붭쯕쪡즢ힰ쮮쓠
#쪮뛾컥$랢햹맦뮮죏캪즢ힰ쮮쓠솿떽 !"#' 쓪듯떽 #&" Y
#"
* A" 틲듋!쳡짽즢ힰ쮮쓠짺닺벼쫵쫇붵뗍쮮쓠짺닺맽돌
첼업럅뗄폐킧랽쪽횮튻"
&C$ 첼복업잱솦럖컶
룹뻝릫쪽%$'뫍%''럖뇰볆쯣첼복업킧펦폫복업ퟜ솿!
뷡맻죧춼 ' 쯹쪾" 첼복업킧펦폫첼복업ퟜ솿횮볤쎻폐횱뷓
뗄솪쾵!퓚닺횵뇤뮯 #/뗄쟩뺰쿂!쎺첿뾪닉폫쾴톡튵뗄첼
복업킧펦ퟮ룟!복업킧펦듯떽쇋&C&# AX#"
$ 풪!웤듎럖뇰쫇
춼 ' 붭쯕쪡 !3 늿쏅뗄첼복업잱솦럖컶
49?C' 7<F[I> F@LHQ9>?DIA@>A9<BIJe9<>?;H0;!3 ;@QAIF;
춼 * 붭쯕쪡 !3 늿쏅첼복업잱솦럖늼춼
49?C* -9;AF9[HA9I> O<D IJQ<F[I> F@LHQ9>?DIA@>A9<B
IJe9<>?;H0;!3 9>LH;AF9@;
뗧솦)죈솦짺닺릩펦튵%#C'= AX#"
$ 풪')쪯폍볓릤)솶붹벰
뫋좼쇏볓릤튵%"C3$ AX#"
$ 풪')럇뷰쫴뿳컯훆욷튵%"C*& AX
#"
$ 풪')럇뷰쫴뿳벰웤쯻뿳닉톡튵%"C*$ AX#"
$ 풪'" 첼복
업ퟜ솿살뾴!탐튵닺횵뇤뚯 #/틽웰업뗧솦)죈솦뗄짺닺뫍
릩펦튵복업솿듯 #C=$+ " Y#"
* A!듋복업솿햼뗧솦늿쏅떱잰
첼업럅뗄 #C'+/" 뮯톧릤튵캪 #C!=" # Y#"
* A)뷰쫴튱솶벰
톹퇓볓릤튵캪 "C3*" + Y#"
* A)붨훾튵쫇 "C*#= + Y#"
* A)춨
폃)힨폃짨놸훆퓬튵쫇 "C'=! * Y#"
* A"
캪쇋럖컶첼복업솿폫복업킧펦뻹쫴폚룟잱솦뗄늿쏅!
붫붭쯕쪡 !3 룶늿쏅내헕웤복업솿뫍복업킧펦업쏻뷸탐쿳
쿞뮮럖!웤훐 a훡뇭쪾복업킧펦!N훡뇭쪾복업솿!틔룷ퟔ
업쏻뗄뗚쪮컥쏻ퟷ캪뮮럖풭뗣%볻춼 *'" 뚨틥복업잱솦
캪죽룶뗈벶%뗚튻)뗚뛾)뗚죽'!뗚튻쿳쿞쫇복업킧펦폫
복업솿뚼뷏뗍뗄늿쏅!쫴폚뗚죽복업잱솦(뗚뛾쿳쿞쫇복
업킧펦룟)복업솿뗍뗄늿쏅!쫴폚뗚뛾복업잱솦(뗚죽쿳쿞
복업킧펦뫍복업솿뚼뷏룟뗄늿쏅!쫴폚뗚튻복업잱솦늿
쏅(뗚쯄쿳쿞폫뗚뛾쿖쿳몬틥쿠랴!복업킧펦뗍)복업솿
룟!쫴폚뗚뛾복업잱솦늿쏅%볻뇭 &'"
쫴폚뗚튻복업잱솦뗄뗚죽쿳쿞냼몬뗄복업잱솦ퟮ듳
,$+,
컢뎣퇞뗈!믹폚 628M075뗄붭쯕쪡닺튵뷡릹뗷헻폫첼복업잱솦럖컶
뇭 & 붭쯕쪡 !3 늿쏅첼복업잱솦럖샠
K<[C& 7B<;;9J9Q<A9I> IJQ<F[I> F@LHQ9>?DIA@>A9<B;
IJe9<>?;H0;!3 ;@QAIF;
뇠싫
7IL@
복업솿
업쏻
8FL@FIJ
<OIH>AIJ
F@LHQA9I>
복업킧
펦업쏻
8FL@FIJ
@JJ@QAIJ
F@LHQA9I>
복업잱
솦럖샠
7B<;;9J9M
Q<A9I> IJ
F@LHQ9>?
DIA@>A9<B
뇠싫
7IL@
복업솿
업쏻
8FL@FIJ
<OIH>AIJ
F@LHQA9I>
복업킧
펦업쏻
8FL@FIJ
@JJ@QAIJ
F@LHQA9I>
복업잱
솦럖샠
7B<;;9J9M
Q<A9I> IJ
F@LHQ9>?
DIA@>A9<B
< !" !* & D ' #= !
[ #' # # d ## !! !
Q !3 #' & F * #+ !
L != * ! ; + !$ !
@ !$ ' ! A !! !& &
J #= !+ & H !& !# &
? #" !" ! : !+ #* &
R #+ !' & ] # ! #
9 !# #3 & W !* #$ !
e #* 3 ! E !' #" !
f #$ & # S $ #& #
B ! = # << #& #! #
O = $ # <[ #3 !3 &
> & + # <Q 3 != !
I #! ## #
뗄 3 룶늿쏅!럖뇰쫇뗧솦)죈솦뗄짺닺뫍릩펦튵% 늿쏅
]')쎺첿뾪닉폫쾴톡튵%늿쏅 [')뷰쫴튱솶벰톹퇓볓릤튵
%늿쏅 >')뮯톧릤튵%늿쏅 B')붨훾튵%늿쏅 S')럇뷰쫴뿳
컯훆욷튵%늿쏅 O')뷰쫴훆욷튵%늿쏅 I'붻춨퓋쫤)닖뒢
벰폊헾튵%늿쏅 <<'쪯폍볓릤)솶붹벰뫋좼쇏볓릤튵%늿
쏅 f'%볻춼 *'!쮵쏷뛔헢벸룶늿쏅쪵쪩복업헾닟!늻믡
뛔뺭볃닺돶닺짺뷏듳펰쿬!랴뛸믡폐룼듳뗄첼복업" 떫
쫇헢 3 룶늿쏅훐뗄 $ 룶늿쏅%뗧솦)죈솦짺닺)뮯톧릤튵)
럇뷰쫴뿳컯훆욷튵)뷰쫴튱솶벰톹퇓볓릤튵'쫇복업솿폫
복업킧펦닮뻠늻듳뗄늿쏅" 뛔폚뷰쫴훆욷튵뫍붻춨퓋
쫤)닖뒢벰폊헾튵복업솿폫복업킧펦벸뫵춬늽!쟒퓚뗚튻
복업잱솦훐쿠뛔업쏻뾿뫳!헢솽룶늿쏅뗄횱뷓첼업럅잿
뛈뇈웰볤뷓첼업럅잿뛈뷏뗍!틲듋헾뢮뗄복업헾닟펦룃
헫뛔웤쿠맘뗄짏쿂폎닺튵훆뚨복업솿" 샽죧!랢햹쿈뷸
룟킧퓋쫤랽쪽!릹붨컯쇷풰쟸!붻춨컯쇷엤쯍훐탄!쪹폃
쟥뷠붻춨퓋쫤릤뻟뗈"
쎺첿뾪닉쾴톡튵복업킧펦업쏻뗚튻!떫쫇웤복업솿업
쏻 #'!퓚복업쿳쿞춼훐쫴폚뗚뛾쿳쿞뫍뗚죽쿖쿳뗄훐볤!
볈뿉틔뾴ퟷ쫇뻟폐뗚튻복업잱솦튲뿉틔뾴ퟶ쫇뗚뛾복업
잱솦" 헢훷튪폫쎺첿쫇뛠폐탐튵뗄믹뒡탔쓜풴!쿻럑닺돶
솿뷏듳폐맘쾵" 헫뛔쎺첿뾪닉튵뗄복업듫쪩!붭쯕쪡탨튪
랢햹쟥뷠쓜풴뫍탂쓜풴!훰늽쳡룟쓜풴쪹폃킧싊!붵뗍뛔
쎺첿쓜풴뗄틀삵탔!듓뛸붵뗍살ퟔ폚쎺첿쓜풴뗄첼업럅"
샠쯆폚쎺첿헢훖쓜풴탔쿻럑듸살뗄첼업럅뗄뮹폐늿쏅 f
%쪯폍볓릤)솶붹벰뫋좼쇏볓릤튵'!쪯폍볓릤늿쏅ퟔ짭뗄
쓜풴쿻럑첼업럅잿뛈뷶캪 "C3! AX#"
$ 풪!떫쫇웤틾몬뗄볤
뷓첼업럅잿뛈캪 #C#3# # AX#"
$ 풪!볤뷓첼업럅잿뛈업쏻뗚
$%볻뇭 !'!쮵쏷헢킩쓜풴탔늿쏅돽쇋쳡룟ퟔ짭뗄쓜풴킧
싊붵뗍첼업럅틔췢!룼튪붵뗍웤짺닺릩펦솴훐뗄첼업럅!
뿉틔쫊떱쯵뛌릩펦솴!퓶볓닺욷뢽볓횵!복짙릩펦짺닺맽
돌훐뗄첼업럅" 붨훾튵%늿쏅 S'첼복업킧펦업쏻떽 #&!쮵
쏷붨훾튵ퟔ짭뗄첼업럅잿뛈쿠뛔늻룟!헢폫붨훾튵짏폎뗄
쮮쓠짺닺닺튵쳦듺웤업럅쇋듳솿뗄첼업럅폐맘쾵!헫뛔듋
쟩뿶뿉틔쳡룟즢ힰ쮮쓠짺닺뗄벼쫵쮮욽!볓듳뛔즢ힰ쮮쓠
릤틕뗄룄뷸솦뛈" 붨훾튵뗄첼복업솿좴업쏻뗚 $ !쯦ퟅ붭
쯕쪡돇쫐뮯늻뛏췆뷸!붨훾쏦믽늻뛏삩헅!뛔붨훾뷚쓜뇪
ힼ뗄훆뚨뿉틔폐킧붵뗍붨훾튵첼업럅" 붭쯕쪡#쪮뛾컥$
뷚쓜볆뮮풤볆떽 !"#' 쓪쒩!좫쪡릫릲붨훾뷚쓜룄퓬쏦믽
! """췲 O!
)힡햬뷚쓜룄퓬쏦믽듯 $"" 췲 O!
!캪쪵쿖헢튻
쒿뇪!탨튪볓듳싌즫뷚쓜붨훾닄쇏뗄쪹폃!뾪랢뿉퓙짺탂
쓜풴"
뗚튻쿳쿞냼몬쇋 3 룶늿쏅!럖뇰쫇얩쇖쓁폦튵%늿쏅
<')쪯폍뫍쳬좻웸뾪닉튵%늿쏅 Q')쪳욷훆퓬벰퇌닝볓릤
튵%늿쏅 J')럄횯럾ힰ킬쎱욤룯폰죞벰웤훆욷튵%늿쏅 R')
쒾닄볓릤벰볒뻟훆퓬튵%늿쏅 9')틇웷틇뇭벰컄뮯냬릫폃
믺킵훆퓬튵%늿쏅 A')릤틕욷벰웤쯻훆퓬튵%늿쏅 H')럏욷
럏쇏%늿쏅 :')엺랢쇣쫛뫍힡쯞닍틻튵%늿쏅 <['!헢 3 룶
늿쏅뗄첼복업킧펦뫍첼복업솿뚼뷏뗍" 늢쟒 3 룶늿쏅뗄
ퟜ닺돶뷶뷶햼쯹폐탐튵닺돶뗄 #*/!폫뗚튻복업잱솦뗄 3
룶늿쏅쿠뇈뷏!뛔폚첼복업잱솦릱쿗뷏킡!쮵쏷뒫춳뗄릤
튵뛔뺭볃랢햹릱쿗뷏뗍" 뗚죽복업잱솦뗄늿쏅쫇붭쯕쪡
뗄뒫춳닺튵늿쏅!헢킩늿쏅뗄횱뷓첼업럅잿뛈폫볤뷓첼업
럅잿뛈튲뷏뗍" 붭쯕쪡캪쇋듌벤뺭볃랢햹!훰늽쳔청뒫춳
실뫳닺쓜릤튵!틀삵훘릤튵쳡룟뺭볃랢햹쯙뛈!헢붫믡퓬
돉룼듳뗄뮷뺳톹솦뫍닺짺듳솿뗄첼업럅" 쯹틔!춨맽쳡룟
짺닺벼쫵!퓶볓닺횵뷏뗍탐튵뗄닺욷뢽볓횵샽죧럄횯럾ힰ
훆퓬튵!쪵쿖닺튵뷡릹짽벶"
쪣폠뗚쯄쿳쿞뗄 * 룶늿쏅!뗧웸믺킵벰웷닄훆퓬튵
%늿쏅 F'춨폃)힨폃짨놸훆퓬튵%늿쏅 D')붻춨퓋쫤짨놸훆
퓬튵%늿쏅 d')럄횯튵%늿쏅 ?')춨탅짨놸)볆쯣믺벰웤쯻
뗧ퟓ짨놸훆퓬튵%늿쏅 ;')웤쯻%늿쏅 <Q'%냼몬쇋뷰죚튵)
랿뗘닺튵)뻓쏱럾컱튵뫍짧믡놣헏튵뗈'!쫇복업킧펦뗍!
복업솿룟뗄늿쏅!춬쪱뇭 ! 뿉틔뾴떽헢킩늿쏅튲쫇볤뷓첼
업럅듳폚횱뷓첼업럅늿쏅!틲듋탨튪붵뗍헢킩늿쏅뗄볤뷓
첼업럅잿뛈살쪵쿖첼복업" 뗚뛾쿳쿞뗄 ' 룶늿쏅쫇복업
,$=,
훐맺죋뿚*퟊풴폫뮷뺳 !"#' 쓪 뗚 $ 웚
킧펦룟)복업솿뗍뗄늿쏅" 뷰쫴뿳닉톡튵%늿쏅 L'럇뷰쫴
뿳벰웤쯻뿳닉톡튵%늿쏅 @'쮮뗄짺닺뫍릩펦튵%늿쏅 E'
좼웸짺닺뫍릩펦튵%늿쏅 W'퓬횽펡쮢벰컄뷌쳥폽폃욷훆
퓬튵%늿쏅 e'볤뷓첼업럅뷏룟!폈웤쫇럇뷰쫴뿳벰웤쯻닉
뿳튵!헢벸룶늿쏅돽쇋붵뗍웤ퟔ짭뗄첼업럅잿뛈틔췢!튲
튪복짙쿠맘짺닺솴뗄첼업럅잿뛈!쇭췢!헢벸룶늿쏅쫇짺
닺짺믮훐뗄짏폎닺튵!뺭볃닺돶뷏듳!닺횵뇤뮯뛔웤뺭볃
펰쿬뷏듳!탨튪쫊떱뗷헻닺튵뷡릹"
$ 뷡싛폫헾닟붨틩
폫쓜풴쿠맘뗄첼업럅맀쯣랢쿖뗧솦)죈솦뗄짺닺뫍릩
펦튵쫇첼업럅ퟜ솿ퟮ듳뗄늿쏅!햼ퟜ쳥쓜풴쿻럑첼업럅
'"C'=/!웤듎뮯톧릤튵첼업럅햼ퟜ쳥첼업럅뗄 3C*'/!뷰
쫴튱솶벰톹퇓볓릤튵쫇뗚죽릱쿗헟!햼ퟜ쳥첼업럅뗄
3C&#/" 듓첼업럅잿뛈뾴!쎺첿뾪닉쾴톡튵)뗧솦죈솦짺
닺릩펦튵)쪯폍볓릤솶붹)벰뫋좼쇏튵뗈늿쏅풶룟폚웤폠
늿쏅!붭쯕쪡첼업럅훷튪살ퟔ폚쓜풴릩룸늿쏅" 쇖늮잿뗈
죏캪쓜풴잿뛈쫇첼복업뗄훷튪틲쯘!쓜킧쮮욽뗄뇤뮯뛔뛾
퇵뮯첼업럅펰쿬쏷쿔*&"+
!뛸붭쯕쪡뗄쓜풴쿻럑첼업럅뛔
78! 릱쿗뷓뷼 +"/!틲듋!춨맽쪹폃럛쎺좼징벼쫵%.77')
쎺웸뮯솪뫏톭뮷%2,77')듳탍톭뮷쇷뮯뒲%74^'뗈쿈뷸
벼쫵쳡룟쓜풴샻폃잿뛈!춬쪱랢햹쟥뷠쓜풴뫍뾪랢탂쓜풴
뗈쫇폐킧붵뗍첼업럅뗄맘볼듫쪩"
듓짺닺솴쫓뷇뗄볤뷓첼업럅랢쿖뗧솦)죈솦짺닺뫍릩
펦튵%#'C#=& Y#"
* A'틀좻쫇볤뷓첼업럅ퟮ듳뗄늿쏅!헢늻
뷶폫웤ퟔ짭틀삵쎺첿믰솦랢뗧뗄쓜풴뷡릹폐맘!뛸쟒폫쿠
맘뗄짏쿂폎닺튵쓜풴릩룸맽돌업럅폐맘" 닉폃#뗧솦럖
첯$풭퓲*&#+
!붫뗧솦)죈솦짺닺릩펦튵뗄첼업럅럖뷢랢쿖
춨탅짨놸)볆쯣믺벰웤쯻뗧ퟓ짨놸훆퓬튵뛔뗧솦늿쏅뗄첼
업럅릱쿗ퟮ듳!햼뗧솦늿쏅첼업럅뗄*#C'&/!훷튪쫇틲캪
뗧ퟓ짨놸훆퓬튵퓚붭쯕쪡돶뿚쎳틗훐햼뻝뷏듳뇈훘" 헫
뛔돶뿚뛮럝뛮폫첼업럅릱쿗횵!폅뮯돶뿚뷡릹!쳡룟돶뿚
닺욷뗄닺욷뢽볓횵" 춬쪱!틽뷸맺췢쿈뷸짺닺벼쫵!살붵
뗍돶뿚뗄틾몬첼업럅"
쇭췢!뮯톧릤튵튲쫇볤뷓첼업럅뗄훷튪살풴" 쯦ퟅ
붭쯕쪡뷚쓜복업듫쪩뗄쪵쪩!릤튵탐튵뗄횱뷓첼업럅
뷚쓜복업돉맻뇟볊뗝복킧펦죕틦쿔쿖!뛸캻폚볤뷓업
럅뗄뗚죽닺튵잱솦붫돉캪뷱뫳췚뻲첼복업잱솦뗄훘뗣
쇬폲!헢튻뷡싛춬췵뾭*&!+ 볆쯣훐맺헻룶럾컱튵첼복업
잱솦뗄뷡싛튻훂" 헫뛔뮯릤탐튵떱잰닺욷뷡릹뢴퓓)
룟쿻뫄)듖볓릤)뗍뢽볓횵닺욷뇈훘욫룟쿖쿳!탨튪쳡
룟뮯릤탐튵뗄뺫쾸뮯돌뛈!쳔청실뫳릤틕벼쫵!틽뷸쿈
뷸벼쫵!룄뷸릤틕짺닺쇷돌"
첼복업잱솦럖컶랢쿖!쓜풴쏜벯탔탐튵돽쇋쫇룟첼업
럅탐튵틔췢!튲쫇첼복업잱솦ퟮ듳뗄탐튵%죧뗧솦)죈솦짺
닺릩펦튵복업킧펦 #C'= AX#"
$ 풪!쎺첿뾪닉쾴톡튵복업킧
펦 &C&# AX#"
$ 풪뗈'" 붨훾튵첼복업솿룟뛸복업킧펦뷏
뗍!붭쯕쪡릤튵뮯폫돇쫐뮯뗄늻뛏췆뷸!붨훾쏦믽ퟜ솿뗄
퓶뎤뛔쪵쪩붨훾튵복업킧맻쏷쿔!떫쫇웤짏폎뗄쮮쓠짺닺
탐튵뗄볤뷓첼업럅펰쿬!쪹뗃웤복업킧펦뫜뗍" 뒫춳닺튵
늿쏅샽죧얩쇖쓁폦튵)럄횯럾ힰ튵)볒뻟훆퓬튵뗈뗄첼복
업늻쿔훸!틲캪헢킩탐튵뛔ퟜ쳥첼업럅뗄릱쿗튲뷏뗍!틲
듋붭쯕쪡퓚늻뛏쳔청실뫳닺쓜뗄릤튵늿쏅뗄맽돌훐!탨튪
힪뇤뺭볃퓶뎤랽쪽!뗷헻닺튵뷡릹!붵뗍쓜풴잿뛈닅쫇첼
복업뗄폐킧춾뺶" 헫뛔복업잱솦뢡뚯뗄탐튵!샽죧뗚뛾쿳
쿞뫍뗚쯄쿳쿞뗄늿쏅!룹뻝늻춬복업잱솦쳘헷!틲뗘훆틋
훆뚨복업닟싔" 튻랽쏦랢햹탂쓜풴믲쟥뷠쓜풴살듺쳦뒫
춳쓜풴뗄쪹폃!쇭튻랽쏦틽뷸쿈뷸벼쫵!붵뗍짺닺맽돌뗄
첼업럅!퓶볓닺욷뢽볓횵"
첼복업벼쫵뷇뛈뛸퇔!붨틩헾뢮늿쏅쳡릩샭싛벼쫵맦
뮮횸떼!늢뛔훘뗣업럅탐튵틽뷸췢퟊뫍쿈뷸벼쫵살쳡룟뷚
쓜복업킧맻" 샽죧쮮쓠탐튵뒿뗍컂폠죈랢뗧)룖쳺탐튵룟
슯닮랢뗧)뗍죈횵쎺웸랢뗧뗈벼쫵뗄맣랺췆맣쪹폃살쳦듺
뗧솦)죈솦탐튵뗄랢뗧!듓뛸붵뗍듋탐튵뗄쓜뫄업럅솿"
쇭췢!쒿잰컒맺쪹폃뗄믰뗧믺ퟩ훷튪쫇좼쎺랢뗧믺ퟩ!듦
퓚컛좾퇏훘!릩뗧쎺뫄룟뗄컊쳢!랢햹룟닎쫽)듳죝솿좼쎺
믺ퟩ!쳬좻웸 %좼웸 %헴웻솪뫏톭뮷랢뗧믺ퟩ!쫇쳡룟믰
뗧죈킧싊뗄훘튪춻웆뿚"
믽벫뾪랢샻폃탂쓜풴!듙뷸쓜풴뷡릹폅뮯" 캪쇋복짙
붭쯕쪡틔쎺첿캪훷듸살뗄뮷뺳톹솦!맄샸쪹폃쳬좻웸뫍뷕
룑헓웸틔쳡룟쎺뗄쟥뷠쪹폃" 룹뻝떱잰탂쓜풴샻폃ힴ뿶!
얬솦삩듳탂쓜풴샻폃랶캧!쳡룟좫쪡쓜풴ힰ믺죝솿뫍랢뗧
솿" 첫퇴쓜ힰ믺죝솿뫍랢뗧솿쒿잰퓚붭쯕쪡돊쿖놬랢쪽
퓶뎤!믽벫뾪랢럧쓜ힰ믺죝솿!쳡룟짺컯훊쓜랢뗧솿!췘뿭
맢럼닺튵뗄랢햹"
ퟜ횮!닺튵뷡릹폅뮯뗷헻뻟폐뷡릹탔붵첼ퟷ폃!뛌웚
쓚킧맻뷏캪쏷쿔!붵첼킧펦룟폚벼쫵뷸늽" 틲듋!캴살뺭
볃랢햹랽쪽뗄뗍첼뮯힪탍펦훘뗣맘힢닺튵뷡릹뗷헻!뷸튻
늽볓듳닺튵뷡릹뗄뗷헻솦뛈!듓풴춷짏틖훆뷏룟뗄쓜풴쿻
럑룕탔퓶뎤쫆춷" 볓뿬릹붨죽듎닺튵킭뗷삭뚯)럾컱뺭볃
캪훷뗄닺튵쳥쾵!볓뿬뗚뛾닺튵쓚늿뷡릹짽벶뷸돌" 횴탐
룟뫄쓜)룟첼업럅탐튵뗄첼업럅쿞뛮뇪ힼ!쪵탐뷚쓜ힼ죫
훆뫍뷚쓜쳔청훆!퇏룱뿘훆룟뫄쓜닺튵랢햹!뷸튻늽볓듳
실뫳닺쓜뗄쳔청솦뛈!쪵쿖훘릤튵)룟뫄쓜탐튵뗄폅훊뮯
뫍뇈훘뗄뫏샭뮯"
!뇠벭"폚 뷜#
닎뾼컄쿗(T@J@F@>Q@;)
*#+ ,F@??\! 5>LF@;T! 1<FB<>L ,C7R9><& 6O9;;9I>;.<AA@F> IJAR@
,$3,
컢뎣퇞뗈!믹폚 628M075뗄붭쯕쪡닺튵뷡릹뗷헻폫첼복업잱솦럖컶
(IFBL 0@<L@F9> 78! 6O9;;9I>;JFIO 4I;;9B4H@B7I>;HODA9I> <>L
7@O@>A.FILHQA9I> * \+C,@IDRE;9Q<BT@;@<FQR 0@AA@F;! !""=! &'
%='&# %'C
*!+엋볒뮪!췵쒱C맺볊웸뫲첸에탂룱뻖폫훐맺뗄뚨캻컊쳢첽쳖*\+C
훐맺죋뿚,퟊풴폫뮷뺳!!"#$!!$%$'&# %'C*.<> \9<RH<! (<>?
1IHC7B9O<A@T@?9O@^H9BL9>?9> <7R<>?9>?(IFBL <>L 7R9><0 ;
TIB@9> ,BI[<B7B9O<A@ ,I:@F><>Q@ * \+C 7R9>< .IDHB<A9I>!
T@;IHFQ@;<>L 6>:9FI>O@>A! !"#$! !$%$'&# %'C+
*&+쇵컀뚫!헅샗!췵샱쎯!뗈C컒맺뗍첼뺭볃랢햹뿲볜돵늽퇐뺿*\+C
뗘샭퇐뺿!!"#"!!3 %' '&++= %+==C* 09H (@9LI>?! _R<>?0@9!
(<>?09O<I! @A<BC 5 Gf@AQR 1<D IJ0I]MQ<F[I> 6QI>IO9Q
-@:@BIDO@>A9> 7R9><* \+C,@I?F<DRET@;@<FQR! !"#"! !3 % ' '&
++= %+==C+
*$+1<F9> ,! 1<SS<>A91! 1I>A9>95C09>f9>?c5165 <>L 2>DHA
8HADHAJIF7I>;HODA9I> b;C.FILHQA9I> .@F;D@QA9:@0 5><BE;@;&
6:9L@>Q@I> 6O9;;9I> 6JJ9Q9@>QE<>L 5??F@?<A9I> ^9<;@;h;9>?AR@
2A<B9<> <>L GD<>9;R 6>:9FI>O@>A<B 5QQIH>A;* \+C6QIBI?9Q<B
6QI>IO9Q;! !"#!!+$&+# %=$C
*'+1H>f;?<<FL \! .@L@F;@> U5C78! 5QQIH>A;JIF8D@> 6QI>IO9@;&
.FILHQ@FIF7I>;HO@FT@;DI>;9[9B9AE3 *\+C6>@F?E.IB9QE!!""#!!3
%$'&&!+ %&$C
**+헔죙쟕!믆쿍뷰!룟즺!뗈C붭쯕쪡첼업럅쟥떥닢쯣벰복업잱솦럖
컶*\+C뗘폲퇐뺿폫뾪랢!!"#&!&!%!'&#"3 %##'C*_R<ITI>?d9>!
PH<>?a9<>e9>! ,<IGR<>!@A<BCT@?9I><B7<F[I> 6O9;;9I> 2>:@>AIFE
6;AO9O<A9I> <>L T@LHQA9I> .IA@>A9<B5><BE;9;9> \9<>?;H .FI:9>Q@
*\+C5F@<BT@;@<FQR <>L -@:@BIDO@>A! !"#&!&!%!'&#"3 %##'C+
*++09> ^`! GH> 7 (C6:<BH<A9>? 7<F[I> -9IW9L@ 6O9;;9I>; 9>
2>A@F><A9I><BKF<L@IJ7R9><* \+C6>@F?E.IB9QE! !"#"! &= % # '&
*#& %*!#C
*=+1HF<L9<> T! 807I>>IF1!1<FA9>@SM5B9@F\C6O[IL9@L .IBBHA9I> 9>
KF<L@& 6;A9O<A9>? AR@ 5 6>:9FI>O@>A<B0I<L -9;DB<Q@O@>A0 IJ
2>LH;AF9<B9;@L 7IH>AF9@;* \+C6QIBI?9Q<B6QI>IO9Q;!!""!!$# %# '&
'# %*+C
*3+0@>S@> 1! .<L@00! 1H>f;?<<FL \C78! 1HBA9DB9@F;9>1HBA9MF@?9I>
2>DHA%IHADHA1IL@B;* \+C6QI>IO9QGE;A@O;T@;@<FQR!!""$!#*
%$'&&3! %$#!C
*#"+-<:9;G \! 7<BL@9F<UC7I>;HODA9I>M[<;@L 5QQIH>A9>?IJ78!
6O9;;9I>;*\+C.c5G!!"#"!#"+%#!'&'*+= %'*3!C
*##+P@FA]9QR 6,! .@A@F;,.C7<F[I> 4IIADF9>AIJc<A9I>;& 5,BI[<B
KF<L@M09>f@L 5><BE;9;* \+C6>:9FI>O@>A<BGQ9@>Q@g K@QR>IBI?E!
!""3!$&%#*'&*$#$ %*$!"C
*#!+ GA@9>[@F?@F\U! TI[@FA;\K! .@A@F;, .! @A<BC.<AR]<E;IJ
PHO<> -@:@BIDO@>A<>L 7<F[I> 6O9;;9I>;6O[IL9@L 9> KF<L@*\+C
c<AHF@7B9O<A@7R<>?@!!"#!!%!'&=# %=$C
*#&+ .@A@F;, .! 19>W\7! (@[@F70! @A<BC,FI]AR 9> 6O9;;9I>
KF<>;J@F;:9<2>A@F><A9I><BKF<L@4FIO#33" AI!""= * \+C.c5G!
!"##!#"=%!#'& =3"& %=3"=C
*#$+(@[@F70! .@A@F;,.! ,H<> - ^!@A<BCKR@7I>AF9[HA9I> IJ
7R9@;@6WDIFA;AI7B9O<A@7R<>?@* \+C6>@F?E.IB9QE! !""=! &*
%3'&&'+! %&'++C
*#'+7R@> ,`! _R<>?^C,F@@>RIH;@,<;6O9;;9I>;9> 7R9><!""+&
2>:@>AIFE<>L 2>DHAM8HADHA5><BE;9;*\+C6>@F?E.IB9QE! !"#"!&=
%#"'&*#=" %3&C
*#*+쯯붨컀!돂횾룕!헔죙쟕!뗈C믹폚춶죫닺돶럖컶뗄훐맺첼업럅
ퟣ벣퇐뺿*\+C훐맺죋뿚,퟊풴폫뮷뺳!!"#"!!" %''&!= %&$C
*GH> \9<>]@9! 7R@> _R9?<>?! _R<ITI>?d9>! @A<BCT@;@<FQR I>
7<F[I> 6O9;;9I> 4IIADF9>AIJ7R9><^<;@L I> 2>DHAMIHADHA1IL@B
*\+C7R9><.IDHB<A9I>! T@;IHFQ@;<>L 6>:9FI>O@>A! !"#"!!"%''&
!= %&$C+
*#++ 7R@> ,`! 7R@> _1C7<F[I> 6O9;;9I>;<>L T@;IHFQ@;h;@[E
7R9>@;@6QI>IOE!""+& 5#&'M;@QAIF2>:@>AIFE<>L 2>DHAM8HADHA
6O[IL9O@>A* \+C 7IOOH>9Q<A9I>;9> cI>B9>@<FGQ9@>Q@ <>L
cHO@F9Q<BG9OHB<A9I>!!"#"!#'%##'&&*$+ %+&!C
*#=+(@[@F7 0! 1<AAR@]; P GC `H<>A9JE9>? AR@ ,BI[<B <>L
-9;AF9[HA9I><B5;D@QA;IJ5O@F9Q<> PIH;@RIBL 7<F[I> 4IIADF9>A*\+C
6QIBI?9Q<B6QI>IO9Q;! !""=!**%!&'&&+3 %3#C
*#3+(IIL T! -@E7\C5H;AF<B9<0 ;7<F[I> 4IIADF9>A* \+C6QI>IO9Q
GE;A@O;T@;@<FQR! !""3!!#%&'&!$& %**C
*!"+G<>QR@SM7RIB9S\! -H<FA@ TC 78! 6O9;;9I>; 6O[IL9@L 9>
2>A@F><A9I><BKF<L@& 6:9L@>Q@JIFGD<9>*\+C6>@F?EDIB9QE!!""$!
&!%#='&#333 %!""'C
*!#+ 헅췺!훜풾퓆C놱뺩쓜풴쿻럑업럅 78! 퓶솿뗄럖뷢퇐뺿&믹폚
2-5램뗄 01-2벼쫵럖컶* \+C뗘샭뿆톧뷸햹!!"#&!&! %$ '&
'#$ %'!#C*_R<>?(<>?! _RIH NH@EH>C5> 6OD9F9Q<B5><BE;9;IJ
AR@2>QF@O@>AIJ78! 6O9;;9I> JFIO6>@F?E7I>;HODA9I> 9> ^@9e9>?&
^<;@L I> 01-2K@QR>9dH@ IJ2-5 1@ARIL * \+C.FI?F@;;9>
,@I?F<DRE! !"#&!&!%$'&'#$ %'!#C+
*!!+탬돉쇺!죎붨삼!릮닓뻪C닺튵뷡릹뗷헻뛔즽뚫쪡첼업럅뗄펰쿬
*\+Cퟔ좻퟊풴톧놨!!"#$!!3 %!'&!"# %!#"C* aH 7R@>?BI>?!
T@> \9<>B<>! ,I>?7<>eH<>C KR@2>JBH@>Q@IJ5LeH;AO@>A9>
2>LH;AF9<BGAFHQAHF@;I> 7<F[I> 6O9;;9I>;9> GR<>LI>?.FI:9>Q@
*\+C\IHF><BIJc<AHF<BT@;IHFQ@;! !"#$!!3%!'&!"# %!#"C+
*!&+풭틣뻼!췵톩C닺튵뷡릹뗷헻늻춬쒿뇪뛔붵뗍뛾퇵뮯첼업럅솿
킧맻퇐뺿*\+C릤튵벼쫵뺭볃!!"#&!!&'%''&##& %#!!C* NH<>
N9eH>C(<>?aH@C2OD<QAIJ-9JJ@F@>A8[e@QA9:@;IJ2>LH;AF9<B
GAFHQAHF<B5LeH;AO@>AI> 7<F[I> -9IW9L@6O9;;9I> T@LHQA9I> 9>
7R9><*\+C\IHF><BIJ2>LH;AF9<BK@QR>IBI?9Q<B6QI>IO9Q;! !"#&!!&'
%''&##& %#!!C+
*!$+얣뫨샙!붭뿉짪C훐맺닺튵뷡릹뗷헻첼업럅킧펦뗄뛠쒿뇪틅뒫
쯣램*\+C쾵춳맜샭톧놨!!"#&!!!%$'&'*" %'+!C*c9H PI>?B@9!
\9<>?U@;R@>C1HBA9MI[e@QA9:@,@>@A9Q5B?IF9ARO JIF8DA9O9S9>?
7<F[I> 6O9;;9I> JFIO2>LH;AF9<BGAFHQAHF@5LeH;AO@>A9> 7R9><*\+C
\IHF><BIJGE;A@O;g1<>?@O@>A!!"#&!!!%$'&'*" %'+!C+
*!'+GRH9^! P<FF9;;T7CKR@TIB@IJ78! 6O[IL9O@>A9> hG %7R9><
KF<L@*\+C6>@F?E.IB9QE!!""*! &$ %#='&$"*& %$"*=C
*!*+쳆붨죙!샮킥C믹폚 628M075뗄틾몬첼업럅맀쯣벰뗘쟸닮틬
뮯퇐뺿&붭헣뮦뗘쟸틾몬첼업럅릹돉폫닮틬*\+C릤튵벼쫵뺭
볃!!"#&!!&$%$'&#!' %#&'C*K<>?\9<>FI>?! 09N@W9<ICGAHLEI>
,'",
훐맺죋뿚*퟊풴폫뮷뺳 !"#' 쓪 뗚 $ 웚
AR@-9JJ@F@>A9<A9I> IJT@?9I><B2ODB9Q9A7<F[I> 6O9;;9I>;^<;@L I>
628M075&7IODI;9A9I> <>L -9JJ@F@>Q@;IJ2ODB9Q9A7<F[I> 6O9;;9I>;
^<;@L I> 628MQIODI;9A9I> <>L -9JJ@F@>Q@;IJ2ODB9Q9A7<F[I>
6O9;;9I>;9> N<>?AS@T9:@F-@BA<* \+C \IHF><BIJ2>LH;AF9<B
K@QR>IBI?9Q<B6QI>IO9Q;! !"#&!!&$%$'&#!' %#&'C+
*!++볆뻼욽!쇵샚!십쿾쏷C믹폚 628M075쒣탍뗄훐맺늿쏅컂쫒웸쳥
업럅뷡릹퇐뺿*\+C놱뺩듳톧톧놨&ퟔ좻뿆톧냦!!"##!$+ %$'&
+$# %+$3C*\9\H>D9>?! 09H 0@9! 1<a9<IO9>?C,F@@>RIH;@,<;
6O9;;9I>;[E7R9>@;@6QI>IOE& 5> 5;;@;;O@>A^<;@L I> 628M075
1IL@B*\+C5QA<GQ9@>A9<FHO c<AHF<B9HO h>9:@F;9A<A9;.@f9>@>;9;!
!"##!$+%$'&+$# %+$3C+
*!=+4@>?NN! U@N0C7R9><0;4IF@9?> KF<L@<>L 7B9O<A@7R<>?@& 5
7<;@GAHLEIJ78! 6O9;;9I>;* \+C6>@F?E.IB9QE!!"#"!&= %# '&
&'" %&'*C
*!3+N<>?\! 7R@> ^C7<F[I> 4IIADF9>A6;A9O<A9I> IJ7R9>@;@6QI>IO9Q
G@QAIF;^<;@L I> 5 KRF@@MA9@F 1IL@B* \+CT@>@]<[B@ <>L
GH;A<9><[B@6>@F?ET@:9@];!!"#$!!3&$33 %'"+C
*&"+쇖늮잿!쯯뒫췺C죧뫎퓚놣헏훐맺뺭볃퓶뎤잰쳡쿂췪돉첼복업
쒿뇪*\+C훐맺짧믡뿆톧!!"##!%#'&*$ %+*C*09> ^Id9<>?! GH>
7RH<>]<>?C PI] 7<> 7R9>< 5QR9@:@ 2A; 7<F[I> 6O9;;9I>
T@LHQA9I> K<F?@A(R9B@GH;A<9>9>?6QI>IO9Q,FI]AR3 *\+C7R9><
GIQ9<BGQ9@>Q@;! !"##!%#'&*$ %+*C+
*&#+춿헽룯C훐맺뗄첼복업슷뺶폫햽싔톡퓱&믹폚냋듳탐튵늿쏅첼
업럅솿뗄횸쫽럖뷢럖컶*\+C훐맺짧믡뿆톧!!"#!!&&+= %3$C
* KH _R@>??@CGAF<A@?9Q1@<;HF@;AIT@LHQ@7R9><0 ;7<F[I>
6O9;;9I>;& ^<;@L I> 2>L@W-@QIODI;9A9I> 5><BE;9;IJ7<F[I>
6O9;;9I>;9> 69?RA2>LH;AF9@;*\+CGIQ9<BGQ9@>Q@;9> 7R9><! !"#!!
&&+= %3$C+
*&!+췵뾭!샮뻪!쳆폮쇨!뗈C훐맺럾컱튵쓜풴쿻럑첼업럅솿뫋쯣벰
펰쿬틲쯘럖컶*\+C훐맺죋뿚,퟊풴폫뮷뺳!!"#&!!&%''&!# %
!=C*(<>?U<9! 09\H<>! K<>?NHB9>?! @A<BC7<F[I> 6O9;;9I>;
5QQIH>A9>?<>L -@QIODI;9A9I> 5><BE;9;IJ6>@F?E7I>;HODA9I> IJ
G@F:9Q@2>LH;AFE9> 7R9><* \+C7R9><.IDHB<A9I>! T@;IHFQ@;<>L
6>:9FI>O@>A! !"#&!!&%''&!# %!=C+
83FDM2+2*O63)N2HI+FD@HINGHNIJ8)1N2HKJ3HF3)4FIQ*3>J)NGH+*39*HJ3H+FD+3
Z+F3V2N9I*W+3GJ&TF2J)*3?6:Y<48C*)JD
PR!B#89<@#8 AR;71H"#8<&"8 !AR;4H"#C<N(" HR1?C<="#89 :R>#8 .4."
%7IBB@?@IJ,@I?F<DR9Q<>L 8Q@<>I?F<DR9QGQ9@>Q@;! c<>e9>?h>9:@F;9AE! c<>e9>?\9<>?;H !#""3&! 7R9><'
8Q2HIFGH (9AR AR@L@:@BIDO@>AIJHF[<>9S<A9I> <>L 9>LH;AF9<B9S<A9I>! 9A9;<R@<A@L QI>AF<L9QA9I> [@A]@@> @QI>IO9Q?FI]AR <>L
@>:9FI>O@>A<BDF@;;HF@;CKR@F@JIF@! AI;<:@@>@F?E<>L F@LHQ@Q<F[I> @O9;;9I>! 9>LH;AF9<BF@;AFHQA9>?9;IJ?F@<A9ODIFA<>A<>Q@C
\9<>?;H .FI:9>Q@9;I>@IJAR@OI;AL@:@BID@L 9>LH;AF9<B@QI>IO9@;<;]@BB<;AR@[9??@;AQ<F[I> @O9AA@F;CP@>Q@! A<f9>?AR@L@A<9B@L
9>LH;AF9@;IJ\9<>?;H .FI:9>Q@<;<Q<;@;AHLE! AR9;D<D@F@;A9O<A@;L9F@QA<>L 9>L9F@QAQ<F[I> @O9;;9I>;IJ9>LH;AF9@;H;9>?9>DHAMIHADHA
B9J@QEQB@<;;@;;O@>AOIL@BC5>L AR@> Q<F[I> F@LHQ9>?DIA@>A9<BOIL@B;]@F@QF@<A@L AI;9OHB<A@AR@@JJ@QAIJF@LHQ9>?DIA@>A9<B
F@;HBA@L JFIO9>LH;AF9<BF@;AFHQAHF9>?CKR@F@;HBA;;RI]AR<A& (KR@B<F?@;AQI>AF9[HAIFAIL9F@QAQ<F[I> @O9;;9I>;Q<H;@L [EDF9O<FE
@>@F?EQI>;HODA9I> 9;@B@QAF9Q<>L R@<ADI]@F! ]R9QR <QQIH>A;JIF'"C'=/ IJAIA<BQ<F[I> @O9;;9I>;[<;@L I> @>@F?EQI>;HODA9I>!
JIBBI]@L [EQR@O9Q<B9>LH;AFE%3C*'/'! <>L O@A<BO@BA9>?<>L FIBB9>?9>LH;AFE@%3C&#/'C)4FIOAR@DFILHQ@QR<9>;D@F;D@QA9:@!
AR@O<eIF9>LH;AFE@O9AA@F;IJ9>L9F@QAQ<F[I> @O9;;9I>;<F@@B@QAF9Q<>L R@<ADI]@F%# '#=C& Y#"
$ AI>;'! QI<BO9>9>?<>L LF@;;9>?
%="3C3= Y#"
$ AI>;' <>L D@AFIB@HOF@J9>9>?! QIf9>?<>L >HQB@<F9>LH;AFE%$*3C$$ Y#"
$ AI>;'( JFIOQI>;HO@FL@O<>L D@F;D@QA9:@!
@WDIFA@O[IL9@L @O9;;9I>;9;<O<eIFQI>AF9[HAIFAIAR@I:@F<BB9>L9F@QA@O9;;9I>;C5AAR@;@QAIFB@:@B! A@B@QIOOH>9Q<A9I>! QIODHA@F
<>L IAR@F@dH9DO@>AO<>HJ<QAHF9>?% #*C''/ IJAIA<B@WDIFA;Q<F[I> @O9;;9I>;'! O@A<BO9>@F<B;O9>9>?<>L LF@;;9>?9>LH;AFE
%#!C*'/'! AF<>;DIFA<A9I> @dH9DO@>AO<>HJ<QAHF9>?%#!C$3/' <F@I[:9IH;QI>AF9[HAIF;AIAR@@WDIFA@O[IL9@L Q<F[I> @O9;;9I>;C*
KR@B<F?@;AQI>AF9[HAIF;@QAIF;IJQ<F[I> F@LHQ9>?DIA@>A9<B<F@O<9>BE@>@F?EM9>A@>;9:@9>LH;AF9@;C4IF@W<ODB@! ]R@> AR@IHADHA:<BH@
IJ9>LH;AFEQR<>?@;[E#/! AR@F@LHQA9I> @JJ@QAIJ@B@QAF9Q<>L R@<ADI]@F9>LH;AFE]IHBL QR<>?@#C'= AX#"
$ EH<>! ]R9QR AR@<OIH>A
IJQ<F[I> F@LHQA9I> <QQIH>A;JIF#C'+/ IJAR@AIA<BQ<F[I> @O9;;9I>;9> !"#"CKR@F@JIF@! AR9;D<D@FO<f@;;H??@;A9I>;AI\9<>?;H
.FI:9>Q@?FI:@F>O@>AAR<AF@>@]<[B@<>L >@]@>@F?E;RIHBL [@L@:@BID@L AIIDA9O9S@AR@@>@F?E;AFHQAHF@<;]@BB<;9ODFI:9>?@>@F?E
@JJ9Q9@>QE[EH;9>?AR@<L:<>Q@L A@QR>IBI?E! ;HQR <;.HB:@F9S@L 7I<B7IO[H;A9I> %.77'! 2>A@?F<A@L ,<;9J9Q<A9I> 7IO[9>@L 7EQB@
%2,77'! <>L 79FQHB<A9>?4BH9L9S@L ^@L%74^'C2> <LL9A9I>! @>R<>Q9>?DFILHQA9I> :<BH@IJB<F?@FF@LHQA9I> DIA@>Q9<B;@QAIF;! ;HQR <;
QIOOH>9Q<A9I> @dH9DO@>A! QIODHA@F<>L IAR@F@B@QAFI>9Q9>LH;AFE! <>L ?@>@F<BIF;D@Q9<B@dH9DO@>AO<>HJ<QAHF9>?C
RJM S*I)2 628M075( Q<F[I> @O9;;9I>;( 9>LH;AF9<BF@;AFHQAHF9>?( F@LHQA9I> DIA@>A9<B( \9<>?;H DFI:9>Q@
,'#,
컢뎣퇞뗈!믹폚 628M075뗄붭쯕쪡닺튵뷡릹뗷헻폫첼복업잱솦럖컶
1
资源供给可以区分为自然供给和经济供给两方面
一、资源供给的概念
1、自然供给：资源天生可供人类利用的部分，是由
天然因素决定的，人为努力不能改变。
2、经济供给：可以直接用于人类生产和生活的资源
供给，是通过人类的经济活动可以改变和调节的。
3、经济学意义上的资源供给：是指在一定价格条件
下资源占有者愿意提供一定质量资源的数量。
第二节：资源供给
2
二、资源供给的影响因素
1、自然供给的影响因素：
 （1）生物资源的自然供给主
要受到生物资源繁殖能力的限
制。在一定的时间内，生物资
源的最大自然供给是由生物的
繁殖能力大小来决定的。
第二节：资源供给
3
 （2）非生物再生资源的自然供给的影响因素很复
杂。例如，土地资源的自然供给主要受到气候条件、
地形地貌、交通条件等限制；而水资源则还受气候
条件等限制。
 （3）耗竭资源的自然供给主要受到技术因素的影
响。例如，矿产资源勘探技术对于探明储量具有决
定性的影响。
第二节：资源供给
4
2、经济供给的影响因素：
 （1）资源价格；
（2）替代资源的可得性与价格；
（3）资源生产技术和成本；
（4）资源的自然供给量。
第二节：资源供给
5
 （1）资源价格
 通常，资源经济供给与资源交易价格之间呈正相关
关系，即随着资源价格的提高，资源的经济供给会
增加。
 （2）替代资源的可得性与价格
 例如，作为燃料，石油和煤炭是可以相互替代的，
如果石油的价格上升，便会有更多的资本用于石油
生产而增加石油供应，但是，替代资源可得性往往
会限制资源实际可替代程度。再如：出租车使用天
然气和汽油。
第二节：资源供给
6
 （3）资源生产技术和成本
 技术进步可以使资源生产更为容易，会改变资源的
生产成本，使得同样的成本投入可以得到更多的资
源；
 在资源生产技术既定的情况下，资源的生产成本还
受到许多其他因素的影响，比如，政府的税收水平
等都有可能对资源生产成本产生大的影响，进而影
响资源的经济供给。
第二节：资源供给
7
 （4）资源的自然供给量
 资源的经济供给是在资源的自然供给基础上形成的，
因此，不管技术如何进步、资源价格如何变化，资
源的经济供给都不可能突破资源自然供给的上限；
 因此，也可以说，资源的自然供给从根本上限制了
资源的经济供给。
第二节：资源供给
8
三、资源供给的趋势特征
1、耗竭资源的自然供给固定不变，经济供给富于弹性
2、资源开发利用总量逐年增加且与经济增长关系密切
3、资源循环利用程度逐步提高
4、再生资源的再生能力受到严峻威胁
5、资源供给与资源需求不相适应，供需矛盾突出
6、国内资源供给有限，资源对外依赖程度将越来越高
第二节：资源供给
9
1、耗竭资源的自然供给固定不变，经济供给富于弹性
 由于耗竭资源的形成是漫长的时间过程，因此，耗
竭资源的自然供给保持不变；
 相对于耗竭资源自然供给的刚性而言，耗竭资源的
经济供给富于弹性；因为对资源的科学勘探使得经
常会有一些新的矿产被发现，加上采掘技术的进步，
资源的经济供给量是可以在短期内逐步增加的。
第二节：资源供给
10
2、资源开发利用总量逐年增加且与经济增长关系密切
 随着经济增长、人口增加以及人口生活水平的提高，
社会生产和消费对资源的需求都不断增加，受到资
源需求增长的驱动，主要经济资源的开发利用量也
逐年增加。
3、资源循环利用程度逐步提高
 主要是指对可循环利用耗竭资源和部分再生资源的
循环利用，目前主要体现在对水资源、金属矿物等
的循环利用方面。
第二节：资源供给
11
4、再生资源的再生能力受到严峻威胁
 由于工业发展导致大量的污染排放，水体污染、
空气污染以及温室效应，导致生物资源等受到
严重危害，以及耕地资源被大量占用、土地退
化等问题。
5、资源供给与资源需求不相适应，供需矛盾突出
 如我国大量进口能源、部分食物如食用油、大
豆等。
第二节：资源供给
12
6、国内资源供给有限，资源对外依赖程度将越来越高
 目前，我国是世界上石油消费增长最快的国家，在
世界石油需求增长总量中占40%以上，已成为世界
第二大石油消费国。
 不仅如此，有关资料还显示，我国的不少战略性资
源的缺口也将越来越大，不得不靠进口来满足国内
经济发展对这些资源的需求。
第二节：资源供给
1
第二节：产权理论的基本内容
一、产权理论的基本框架
 产权理论的基本框架包括以下四个方面：
 1、交易费用理论；
 2、产权效率分析；
 3、产权制度的选择与调整；
 4、产权制度的演进。
2
 1、交易费用理论
 交易费用是西方产权理论的基础性理论。
 产权理论研究的是如何通过界定、变更和安排产
权的结构，降低市场交易过程中的成本，提高经济运
行的效率，改善资源配置，加快技术进步，促进经济
增长。
 交易费用作为一种资源支出，包括谈判费用、履
约费用等。
第二节：产权理论的基本内容
3
 2、产权的效率分析
 产权理论所要解决的，就是如何通过有效的经济
组织和产权规则，最大限度地减少交易成本，有效地
配置和使用社会资源，促进经济增长。
 有效的经济组织是经济增长的关键，而要保持经
济组织的效率，需要在制度上确立和明晰产权，以便
形成激励机制，将个人的经济努力变成私人收益率接
近社会收益率的活动。
第二节：产权理论的基本内容
4
 3、产权制度的选择和调整
 经济学意义上的“产权”只是当界定权利的费用
与权利带来的好处在边际上达到相等时（也就是均衡
时）才有意义。
 当然，产权明晰的边际成本与边际收益是由现实
约束条件决定的，一旦约束条件改变，意味着产权制
度的选择也就需要调整。
第二节：产权理论的基本内容
5
 4、产权制度的演进
 产权制度演进的历史，实际上就是一个不断地外
部性内在化的过程。
 新的产权的形成就是相互作用的人们对新的收益
-成本的可能预期进行调整的回应。
 产权演进的内在机制在于：当外部性内在化的收
益大于内在化的成本时，新的产权制度就产生了。
第二节：产权理论的基本内容
6
二、我国的资源产权
 作为社会主义公有制国家，根据法律规定我国的
自然资源属于国家和集体所有，个人和其他组织不能
成为自然资源的所有者。
 我国的自然资源在产权制度上是公有制的，在其
使用的管理上是由政府控制的；这也是我国公有制的
主要实现形式，即资源所有权与使用权分离。
第二节：产权理论的基本内容
The effects of basic arable land protection planning in Fuyang County, Zhejiang
Province, China
Taiyang Zhong a,*, Xianjin Huang a
, Xiuying Zhang b
, Steffanie Scott c
, Ke Wang d
a School of Geographic and Oceanographic Sciences, Nanjing University, 22 Hankou Road, Nanjing 210093, Jiangsu Province, China
b International Institute for Earth System Science, Nanjing University, 22 Hankou Road, Nanjing 210093, Jiangsu Province, China
cDept of Geography and Environmental Management, University of Waterloo, 200 University Ave. West, Waterloo, ON N2L 3G1, Canada
d Institute of Remote Sensing & Information System Application, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310029, Zhejiang Province, China
Keywords:
Farmland protection
Basic arable land protection planning
Logistic discrete-time hazards model
Youden index
abstract
The purpose of this study is to determine whether basic arable land protection planning has reduced
arable land loss in Fuyang County, Zhejiang Province, China and, if so, to identify how much arable land
has been saved by the implementation of land use planning. Land use data covering 10 years, from 1999
to 2008, were collected from Fuyang County for analysis. A logistic discrete-time hazards model was used
to model the conversion of arable land, and the effects of basic arable protection planning were estimated. The Youden index was used to determine the cut-off point for predicted probabilities, and the
effects were estimated based on the classification with the cut-off point. Furthermore, an analysis
framework combining effectiveness-based assessment and goals-based assessment was developed. The
results suggest that basic arable land protection planning is effective, with the odds of basic arable land
being converted to other uses decreasing by 89 percent compared with arable land outside the basic
arable land protection district in Fuyang County, and the conversion of arable land in general decreasing
by 72 percent due to basic arable land protection planning. Considering both the effectiveness and goal’s
achievement, the implementation of basic arable land protection planning is judged to be effective, but
not entirely successful. Certain factors made basic arable land protection planning effective, these include
the reallocation of approval rights for arable land conversion to the central government from the local
government, the application of new technology in the central government’s inspections of the local
governments’ land use regulation and land administration, the raising of compensation standards for
arable land expropriation, the creation of a Supervisor of State Land, and the readjustment of the local
land and resources administrative system. However, other factors made the implementation of basic
arable land protection planning not completely successful, including a top-down administrative system
of land use planning, differences of interests regarding land administration between the local and central
governments, and the system by which local government cadres’ performances are evaluated.
 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Introduction
Although increases in agricultural land have been observed in
some special areas (Verburg, Overmars, Huigen, de Groot, &
Veldkamp, 2006; Yu, Zang, Wu, Liu, & Na, 2011), farmland loss is
one of the most significant land use changes in countries with rapid
economic development. This subject has attracted the interest of
researchers because such losses may threaten food security
(Nizeyimana et al., 2001) and so has been the subject of studies
since the 1970s (Foster & Macconnell, 1977; Plaut, 1980). A great
deal of research has analyzed the driving forces behind farmland
loss. Some studies noted links between farmland loss and urban
sprawl (Alphan, 2003; Chen, Chen, Shi, & Tamura, 2003; Deng &
Huang, 2004; Fazal, 2000; Levia, 1998; Mori, 1998; Nizeyimana
et al., 2001; Plaut, 1980; Yeh & Li, 1999; Zhang, 2000) or urbanization (Chen, 2007; Shrestha, York, Boone, & Zhang, 2012; Su, Jiang,
Zhang, & Zhang, 2011; Thapa & Murayama, 2010); some ascribed it
to population growth (Doos, 2002), while others credited it to
industrialization (Kurucu & Chiristina, 2008; Wu & Zhang, 2012),
economic booms (Firman, 2000), construction of transportation
infrastructure, rural urbanization and the expansion of rural
settlements (Liu, Wang, & Long, 2008), political choice (Kelly, 1998),
the changing role of local government (Skinner, Kuhn, & Joseph,
2001), land use policies (Gao, Liu, & Chen, 2006), and other ideas. * Corresponding author. Tel.: þ86 13585204939.
E-mail address: taiyangzhong@163.com (T. Zhong).
Contents lists available at SciVerse ScienceDirect
Applied Geography
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/apgeog
0143-6228/$ e see front matter  2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.apgeog.2012.09.003
Applied Geography 35 (2012) 422e438
Many tools have been developed and utilized to stem farmland loss
based on these analyses. Some technical tools that have been
developed include the agricultural land evaluation and site
assessment (LESA) system developed by the America Soil Conservation Service (T. Daniels, 1990; T.L. Daniels, 1990; DeMers, 1988;
Demers, 1989a,1989b; Ferguson, Bowen, & Kahn, 1991; Huddleston,
Pease, Forrest, Hickerson, & Langridge, 1987; Stamm, Gill, & Page,
1987; F. Steiner, 1987; F. Steiner, Dunford, & Dosdall, 1987; F.R.
Steiner, 1994; Tyler, Hunter, & Steiner, 1987; Ward, 1991; Wright,
Zitzmann, Young, & Googins, 1983), and the application of GIS
and improved models based on that system (Demers, 1989a; Dung
& Sugumaran, 2005; Hoobler, Vance, Hamerlinck, Munn, &
Hayward, 2003; Williams, 1985). Some market-based tools have
also been developed and used to preserve farmland, such as the
purchase of development rights (T. Daniels, 1990; T.L. Daniels,
1990), and the transfer of development rights (McConnell &
Walls, 2009). Command-and-control tools, such as zoning, are
another important family of farmland preservation tools (Munroe,
Croissant, & York, 2005; Nellis & Maca, 1986). Land use planning
is a tool that should also be mentioned in any discussion of farmland protection because it is one of the most important and widely
adopted tools in preserving farmland (Smith & Giraud, 2006) and
has been viewed as a comprehensive tool to manage land use and
to control land use change. Because of this the impact of land use
planning has also attracted researchers’ attention. To date, research
on the impact of land use planning has focused on aspects such as
impact on housing markets (Leishman & Bramley, 2005), housing
prices or values (Bramley, 1993; Ihlanfeldt, 2009; Thorsnes, 2000),
land rents (York & Munroe), housing supply and real estate development (Bramley, 1993; Thorson, 1997; Tse, 2001; Vermeulen & van
Ommeren, 2009), fragmentation of land (Munroe et al., 2005;
Saizen, Mizuno, & Kobayashi, 2006), and ex-urbanization (Esparza
& Carruthers, 2000). Although land use planning has been used
as a tool to control farmland conversion to other uses, there have
been relatively few studies examining its effectiveness. Some
earlier studies used descriptive analysis of a land use category’s
change or the comparative analysis of farmland conversion under
different planning regulations to describe the effect of land use
planning (Daniels & Nelson, 1986; Nelson, 1999; Pease & Jackson,
1979). However, this method of evaluating land use planning’s
effects may overemphasize planning’s influence, as it discounts
other factors that also most likely influence development decisions
(Kline, 2005). A “hedonic” approach has been used to evaluate
zoning’s effects on farmland protection, namely the influence of
zoning on land value has been treated as an impact on the expectation of farmland development (Nelson, 1988).
Land use regulation is one tool for controlling land use based
on land use planning, and its effects have been assessed
(Lichtenberg, Tra, & Hardie, 2007; Wu & Cho, 2007). A recent
study examined the effects of Oregon’s (USA) land use planning
program on the conversion of forest and farmlands (Kline & Alig,
1999). This study applied a more immediate indictor to depict
zoning’s effects on farmland preservation by building empirical
models describing the probability of forests and farmland being
developed. The data used in the study did not cover all of the
forest and farmlands in the study region, but instead drew upon
a systematic sampling of plots. These types of data are suitable for
examining the influence of land use planning on the likelihood of
forest and farmlands being converted to developed uses, yet these
data may create some difficulty in calculating the area of forest
and farmlands that have been saved from development. Another
study assessed the impact of land use planning on farmland
protection, where changes in building densities on forest and
agricultural lands was used as a dependent variable, and the
evaluation of the effectiveness of the land use planning program
was based on the statistical relationship between the dependent
variable and zoning variables (Kline, 2005). In that analysis, the
change in the numbers of new buildings was used a proxy for the
change of farmland and forest. In this study, data from two
periods e between 1974 and 1984 and between 1984 and 1994 e
were used to estimate the effect of land use laws on forest and
farmland (Kline, 2005).
The studies summarized above provide insights into the influence of land use planning; the current study seeks to add to the
existing literature by focusing on whether basic farmland protection planning has affected the conversion of farmland and reinforced farmland protection in Fuyang County, China. Fuyang County
is a suitable case study site due to its good database on land use and
change, its location near a large city, and its history of land use
planning. An empirical model is constructed describing the probability of farmland conversion to non-agricultural use as a function
of basic farmland protection planning and other variables. The
model is then used to judge whether basic farmland protection
planning has saved farmlands from conversion and, if so, how much
farmland has been saved due to the implementation of land use
planning.
Study area and background
Study area
Fuyang County is located in the west of Zhejiang Province,
a province undergoing one of the country’s most rapid industrializing and urbanizing processes (see Fig. 1). Fuyang County is one of
the county-level divisions of Hangzhou City, which is the capital of
Zhejiang Province, a prefecture-level city, and an important city in
the Yangtze Delta Region. Fuyang County is located in the southwest of Hangzhou City and is approximately 32 km from the city
center. Its area is 1831 km2
, of which hilly terrain accounts for
75.9%, plains account for 17%, and water bodies account for 5.4%
(http://hzfzw.hz.gov.cn/wzxg/qsjj/). In 2010, Fuyang County’s
annual mean temperature was 17.2 C, annual rainfall was
1510.6 mm, and the annual non-frost period was 336 days (Bureau
of Statistics of Hangzhou City, NBS Survey Office in Hanghou, &
Hangzhou Bureau of Socio-economic Survey, 2011).
Fuyang County has 4 subdistricts, 15 towns, and 6 townships.
According to the Statistical Yearbook of Hangzhou City 2011, the
total population of Fuyang County in 2010 was approximately
650,200, with a population density of 355 persons per square
kilometer, which is approximately 2.6 times the average population density of China as a whole. Of the total population in
2010, 21 percent was non-agricultural and 79 percent agricultural,
while the proportion of non-agricultural population in 2000 was
16 percent. There are approximately 331,500 employed persons in
the rural area, with 67.5 percent of those working in nonagricultural sectors. Only 107,900 are engaged in traditional agriculture work. The gross domestic product (GDP) per capita of
Fuyang County amounted to 64,101 Yuan (RMB) (Bureau of
Statistics of Hangzhou City et al., 2011), which is 2.16 times the
per capita GDP of China, and increased at the rate of 12.3%, which
was approximately 1.2 times that of China. The proportion of GDP
contributed by the agricultural industry is 6.9%, and the secondary
industry’s GDP constituted 60.7 percent (Bureau of Statistics of
Hangzhou City et al., 2011). During the past decade, industrialization has increased at an unprecedented rate, and the mean
annual growth rate of industrial GDP was approximately 26
percent from 2000 to 2010.
With this rapid economic growth, especially industrial growth,
arable land in Fuyang County faced the risk of conversion to nonagricultural use. Between 1999 and 2008, approximately 1169 ha
T. Zhong et al. / Applied Geography 35 (2012) 422e438 423
of arable land were converted to industrial, urban, residential or
other uses, 205 ha of which was basic arable land. The 1169 ha of
converted arable land accounts for approximately 4.23 percent of
the total amount of arable land in 1999.
Fuyang County’s basic arable land protection planning program
Farmland loss has dominated recent changes in Chinese land
use (Veldkamp et al., 2001). Since 1978, rapid urban expansion
and land marketization has intensified the loss of farmland in
China’s urban periphery (Chen et al., 2003; Wang & Scott, 2008;
Xiao et al., 2006). In some regions of China most of the land use
change is constituted by conversion of agricultural land into urban
areas or to industrial use (Seto & Kaufmann, 2003; Seto et al.,
2002; Weng, 2002). Moreover, the conversion of land to nonagricultural use is rapid and extensive throughout China (Ho &
Lin, 2004b), and the loss of arable land is not only observed in
the urban periphery, but also in rural areas, such as the Yangtze
River Delta and the Pearl River Delta, due to rural industrialization
(Long, Tang, Li, & Heilig, 2007; Xie, Yu, Bai, & Xing, 2006; Xu, 2004;
Yeh & Li, 1999).
It is essential for China to increase food production to keep up
with its growing population and changing consumption patterns
(Verburg, Chen, & Veldkamp, 2000), and some researchers view the
rapid decline of arable land as a threat to China’s food security
(Chen, 2007; Tong, Hall, & Wang, 2003). This is also the point of
view held by the Ministry of Land and Resources and its predecessor, the State Bureau of Land Administration, founded in August
of 1986. Due to the potential impact of the loss of available farmland, China’s central government has since the 1980s initiated land
use policies that support the preservation of farmland, including
issuing a Land Administration Law, carrying out land use surveys
and setting up of land administration bodies in governments above
and at the county level. Land use planning has been viewed as
a leading issue in the land administration system, which has been
called “head of dragon” by scholars and officials from land
administration departments in the Chinese government. Following
this point of view, land use planning has been expected to help
regulate land use and control farmland conversion, and land use
planning has been used as an important tool to curb the rapid loss
of arable land.
As far as administrative divisions in China are concerned, there
are four levels of local government: province, prefecture, county
and township. The land use planning system of China is comprised
by land use planning at all five levels, consisting of a national land
use planning outline, province-level general land use planning,
prefecture-level general land use planning, county-level general
land use planning, and township-level general land use planning.
Since 1980, three National Land Use Planning Outlines have been
compiled and carried out. The National Land Use Planning Outline
(1986e2000) was authorized by the State Council of China in
February 1993, and most of the provincial governments had
compiled province-level general land use plans by the end of 1996.
The National Land Use Planning Outline (1997e2010) was compiled
by the State Bureau of Land Administration in 1997 and was
authorized by the State Council of China in 1999. The National Land
Use Planning Outline (2006e2020) was authorized by the State
Council of China on October 2008. The Land Administration Law of
the People’s Republic of China explains that general plans for land
use at a lower level shall be compiled according to the general plans
for the utilization of land at the next highest level. The Fuyang
County General Land Use Plan (1997e2010) is Fuyang County’s first
land use plan and was authorized by the People’s Government of
Zhejiang Province in 1999.
Fig. 1. Location of study area.
424 T. Zhong et al. / Applied Geography 35 (2012) 422e438
According to the Land Administration Law of China and the Basic
Farmland Protection Regulation passed in 1994 and revised in 1998,
farmland is divided into two types, basic farmland and ordinary
farmland. Basic farmland, or basic arable land, refers to the cultivated land demarcated as basic farmland by the government for
special protection, which has a different meaning in China from
farmland in most countries. Basic Farmland Protection Regulation
does not apply to fishponds, tree fruits and so on (Lichtenberg &
Ding, 2008). Ordinary farmland refers to cultivated lands that are
not designated as basic farmland. Compared with ordinary farmland, basic farmland or basic arable land is under more stringent
protection. According to the Land Administration Law of China as
revised in 1998, only the State Council and province-level governments have the right to approve the conversion and expropriation
of farmland. The conversion and expropriation of basic farmland
shall be approved by the State Council. The conversion and
expropriation of ordinary farmlands exceeding 35 ha also shall be
approved by the State Council, while province-level governments
can approve the conversion and expropriation of ordinary farmland
of less than 35 ha. According to the Land Administration Law of
China and the Basic Farmland Protection Regulation, basic farmland
protection shall be part of general land use planning, and countylevel general land use planning and town-level general land use
planning shall demarcate basic farmland protection zones. In
practice, the basic farmland protection plan was compiled as the
general land use plan was compiled, and it was included in the
general land use plan. The Basic Farmland Protection Regulation
stipulates that the following cultivated land shall be demarcated as
protected areas of basic farmland: a) cultivated land producing
grain, cotton, and oil crops as approved by the relevant department
of the State Council or the local governments at and above the
county level; b) cultivated land with good irrigation, soil, and water
conservation facilities, and medium and low quality cultivated land
where an amelioration plan is being carried out or will be carried
out; c) vegetable production bases; d) experimental fields for
agricultural science and educational purposes; e) other cultivated
land determined as basic farmland by the State Council. Farmland
outside the basic farmland protection zones of a district are usually
called ordinary farmland. The Land Administration Law of China
and the Basic Farmland Protection Regulation request that the areas
of basic farmland demarcated by province-level governments make
up over 80% of the cultivated land within their administrative areas,
and province-level governments usually require lower-level
administrative areas also to designate more than 80% of such land
for basic farmland protection.
The demarcation or assignment of basic farmland protection
zones in Fuyang County was completed in 2000 and was based on
the basic farmland protection plan included in the Fuyang County
General Land Use Plan (1997e2010). A second round of land use
planning for Fuyang County was also carried out and the Fuyang
County General Land Use Plan (2006e2020) was approved by the
Government of Zhejiang Province in December 2010, coming into
operation in 2011. Therefore, the Fuyang County General Land Use
Plan (1997e2010) created in 1999 was still valid prior to 2011.
Data and methods
Data sources
The data on the land use of Fuyang County that were collected
cover 10 years, from 1999 to 2008. The data come from the Bureau
of Land and Resources of Fuyang County, which is the land
administrator in Fuyang County. The analysis of arable land
conversion to other uses is based on ten yearly maps of converted
arable land from 1999 to 2008. The data on arable land and the
conversion of arable land were extracted from the yearly digital
maps of land use for Fuyang County, and the analysis of data
regarding arable land converted to other uses is based on yearly
converted arable land maps from 1999 to 2008. According to the
Land Administration Law of China, any land users wanting to
convert agricultural land to non-agricultural use must submit an
application to the Bureau of Land and Resources for permission to
convert, and after the permission has been approved the conversion can be carried out. Any conversion of agricultural land to nonagricultural purpose without permission is illegal. After the land is
converted, the Bureau of Land and Resources of Fuyang County
check whether the land was converted at the designated location
and within the permitted area and shape.
According to the Land Administration Law of China and
Measures for the Administration of Dynamic Cadastral promulgated by the State Bureau of Land Administration (which was
merged into China’s Ministry of Land and Resources in 1998) and
the Regulation of Land Survey issued by the State Council in 2008,
the Ministry of Land and Resources of China arranges an annual
land use change survey, with county-level departments or divisions
of land use administration carrying out the survey. Whether the
land use change is legal or illegal, land use conversions, especially
the agricultural land conversion to non-agricultural purposes, are
recorded in the annual land use change survey. Furthermore,
Hangzhou City’s land use has been monitored by the Ministry of
Land and Resources of the People’s Republic of China since 2000.
The Bureau of Land and Resources Administration of the Zhejiang
Province check Hangzhou City’s land use data with the assistance of
remotely sensed data and field work. Such work is also carried out
by the Ministry of Land and Resources in China. The remotely
sensed data generated by The Bureau of Land and Resources
Administration of the Zhejiang Province or the Ministry of Land and
Resources in China are integrated into the annual map of land use
by the Bureau of Land and Resources of Fuyang County.
For purposes of this study, arable land was divided into
a 15 m  15 m grid from the 1999 map of arable land. A binary
variable was generated to record the arable conversion process. A
value of “1” for a grid of 15 m  15 m was assigned if it was converted to non-agricultural use during an observed time interval and
“0” otherwise. Another variable was generated to record the grid’s
attributes. A value of “1” for a grid was assigned if it was deemed
basic arable land during a specific time period and “0” otherwise.
The value of “0” was assigned to all the grids before basic arable
land protection planning formally came into place. Given that the
Fuyang County General Land Use Plan (1997e2010) was approved
in 1999 and came into force in 2000 and that the assignment or
demarcation of basic farmland protection zones was carried out in
2000, the value of “0” was assigned to all the grids for 1999. Other
information relevant to the grids was also recorded and used to
create explanatory variables. While longer is better for time series
data, there are no comparable data for years previous to 1999. This
creates a database containing only one year of data before the
formal implementation of basic arable land protection planning
and 9 years of data covering the time during which basic arable
land protection planning was in place. Based on yearly converted
arable land maps from 1999 to 2008, the dataset was created in
a discrete-time fashion. For each grid, each year of the period
constitutes a single row until it is converted, such that each grid is
represented by multiple rows of data with a maximum of 10 rows
per grid.
Methodology to assess the effect of land use planning
Assume a risk-neutral and price-taking land developer faces the
choice of whether to convert a parcel from present agricultural use to
T. Zhong et al. / Applied Geography 35 (2012) 422e438 425
non-agricultural uses. Based on current and historic values of relevant variables, the developer’s conversion decisionwould bemade to
maximize the present discounted value of the stream of expected
future net benefits from the land (Lubowski, Plantinga, & Stavins,
2008). For the developers, the present value of return for a parcel is
the sum of the land rent once developed and the cost of developing
the parcel,with the former viewed as positive and the latter negative.
If the land developer is also a land owner, there would be another
benefit derived from the land before the plot is developed e the
discounted land rent in the undeveloped state e and this can be
treated as one of the costs of development. The present value of
returns to parcel can be expressed as:
VðX; L; TÞ ¼ ZN
T
RðX; L;tÞert dt  CðX; LÞerT dt
where R(X,L,t) is land rent during time period t for the plot of land
developed with the influence of X and L, C(X,L) is the cost of
developing the land with the influence of X and L (including arable
land conversion costs), L is the factor denoting land use planning, X
is the factors influencing V except for L, T is the time period during
which the plot of land is developed, and r is the discount rate.
The developer maximizes V with respect to X, L and T, which
yields the timing condition:
rCðX; LÞ ¼ RðX; L; TÞ
So, the decision whether to develop and the development time T
are related with X and L.
In this study, R(X,L,t) and C(X,L) were not directly observable and
only some factors affecting R(X,L,t) and C(X,L) were observable,
mainly X, L and t. The variable sets of X include such factors as
physical condition, location, and neighborhood. The variable L is the
parcel’s attribute in land use planning, which is, concretely,
whether it is classified as basic arable land. The detail about the
variable sets of X, L and t and their variables selected by this study
are presented in the section on explanatory variables. V is also not
directly observable; however, when a plot of arable land is converted to non-agricultural use or developed, it could be said that
the objective function of V obtains its maximum value. Thus, the
decision regarding arable land conversion can be reduced to
a dichotomous choice conditioned on the time period t, with arable
land conversion assumed to be an indicator of the highest net
present value of returns for a plot. Therefore, a dummy variable Y
was introduced:
Yit ¼
 1; if the plot i was converted
0; otherwise
Given this theoretical framework, the empirical model attempts
to explain the effect of basic farmland protection planning on
farmland development or conversion to non-agricultural use. A
survival model is suitable for this purpose because survival analysis
has been used to analyze the occurrence and timing of arable land
conversion. This analysis is a collection of statistical procedures for
which the outcome variable of interest is time until an event occurs.
This model originated in bio-medical sciences studies and has been
become popular in other disciplines, such as engineering and the
social sciences. However, survival analysis has been applied in only
a few pioneering articles related to geographical land change. These
studies include investigations of forest fallowing behaviors among
swidden cultivators in an Amazonian community in Peru (Coomes,
Grimard, & Burt, 2000), estimating the impacts of demographic,
biophysical and policy factors on forest clearance processes among
smallholder farmers on an agricultural frontier of southern Mexico
(Vance & Geoghegan, 2002), identifying the effect of neighborhood
development spill-overs on the conversion rate of parcels from
undeveloped to residential use (Irwin & Bockstael, 2002),
researching integrating survival analysis with GIS science to
address temporal complexities of land change (An & Brown, 2008),
and studying the dynamic optimization problem of land use (De
Pinto & Nelson, 2009). As the data were collected for the same
set of geographical units for the years 1999e2006, the discretetime survival model is proper, and the discrete-time hazard that
was defined as the probabilities of the conversion occurring can be
estimated by using a logistic regression model called the logistic
discrete-time hazards model (Sophia & Anders, 2008), the form of
which is:
logitfProb ðYit ¼ 1ÞÞjd; Xg ¼ a þ 4d þ sL þ bX
where, a is the constant, d are a vector of dummy variables for year
2000e2006, 4, s andb are vector of coefficients for d, L and X
respectively.
There are two crucial questions regarding the effects of basic
farmland protection planning. The first question is whether basic
farmland protection planning has saved farmlands from conversion, and the second is how much farmland was saved if the basic
farmland protection planning did preserve farmland. The former
can be judged from the estimated coefficients related with L: if the
estimated coefficients related with L are consistent with their expected signs and statistically significant, we can conclude that the
basic farmland protection plan has been effective in saving farmland from development.
The area of farmland saved from development due to basic
farmland protection planning can be computed by comparing the
predicted area of farmland converted to non-agricultural use with
and without basic farmland protection planning. As logistic
discrete-time hazards model estimated by using a logistic regression model, the prediction for any observation is a probability of an
event occurring; this is different from prediction in a regression
model. The predicted probability for each observation ranges from
0 to 100%, and this leads to the question: what is the threshold
value of the percent for a plot or pixel to be counted as a converted
grid? 50% or 0.5 was the most common value taken as the critical
threshold for predicted probabilities, and the observations with
predicted probabilities higher than 50% were regarded as presence
(Geoghegan et al., 2001; Hosmer & Lemeshow, 2000; Lakes, Muller,
& Kruger, 2009). However, the cut-off value of 50% might not work
in some circumstance and is most likely not the optimal cut-point,
especially when events or non-events are rare (Hein & Weiskittel).
The lowest degree of misclassification of outcomes is incurred by
the optimal threshold, where misclassification is quantified as the
proportion of individuals incorrectly classified (Eric Vittinghoff,
Glidden, & McCulloch, 2005). Sensitivity and specificity are often
used as complementary measures to assess the prediction rules for
logistic regression, sensitivity is the proportion of correctly classified events and specificity is the proportion of correctly classified
non-events (Eric Vittinghoff et al., 2005). The point which maximizes both specificity and sensitivity is suggested as the cut-point
(Hosmer & Lemeshow, 2000). The point where the value of sensitivity and that of specificity are equivalent is potentially one of the
best cut-points. It is a feasible means for optimal threshold choice
when sensitivity and specificity curves have the same slope, but
this requirement is not always met. Fortunately, there are three
methods that can be used to determine the optimal cut-off point
from the receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve; the Youden
index is the commonly used criterion (Kumar & Indrayan, 2011).
The Youden index is defined as the sum of sensitivity, specificity
and 1, which means the better the classification at the cut-point,
426 T. Zhong et al. / Applied Geography 35 (2012) 422e438
the higher the value of the Youden index (Agarwal et al., 2008).
Because the minimum point of misclassification rate can coincide
with the point where the curve of the sum of sensitivity and
specificity has its maximum value, the optimal cut-off value is the
probability with the maximum Youden index (Hein & Weiskittel,
2010). The Youden index was used to choose an optimal cut-off
point in this study. Predicted probabilities were calculated by
applying the estimated coefficients with and without basic farmland protection planning, and the classification was made with cut
value determined by using the Youden index. Based on the classification, the corresponding predicted area of converted farmland
was computed.
The explanatory variables
There are several factors that could influence the occurrence and
timing of farmland conversion. Table 1 provides an overview of the
definitions and the expected sign for each independent variable.
The first set of variables listed in Table 1 is the year dummy variables. The variables of d1, d2, d3, d4, d5, d6, d7, d8 and d9 are
dummy variables for year 2000, 2001, 2002, 2003, 2004, 2005,
2006, 2007 and 2008. The exponentials of coefficients for year
dummy variables represent the odds ratio of conversion in a given
year compared with the year 1999. The Chinese economic situation
changed from 1999 to 2008, which unavoidably influenced Fuyang
County’s economic growth. The changing economy led to different
demands for farmland conversion for construction purposes in
different years. As far as farmland preservation policy is concerned,
besides laws and rules on land use administration, the Chinese
central government often issued policy documents, such as notices
to intensify farmland protection, which made every year’s actual
rigidity of farmland protection different. Therefore, the signs of
coefficients for year’s dummy variables may be different.
The second set of variables is the factor denoting land use
planning, and a dummy variable of Planning was used for this
purpose, which takes the value of “1” for the grids belonging to
basic farmland districts and “0” for otherwise. Because more
rigorous regulation of conversion and expropriation had been
imposed on basic farmland than ordinary farmland, if the basic
farmland protection plans have been implemented vigorously, the
probability of conversion of basic farmland would be lower than
that of ordinary farmland. Thus, the variable Planning is expected to
have a positive sign if basic farmland protection planning performed well and the regulations protecting basic farmland
protection have been thoroughly implemented.
The third set is variables regarding parcel-level characteristics
and includes these variables: Elevation, Slope, Road, Ynmr, City,
Town, Village, Factory and Construction. Many studies have shown
that elevation is an important factor influencing land use decisions
in mountainous regions (Mottet, Ladet, Coque, & Gibon, 2006;
Tasser, Walde, Tappeiner, Teutsch, & Noggler, 2007). For a land
development project, especially for land use conversion in a hilly
region, the elevation of the plot to be developed is usually included
with the development cost and has a negative effect on land
development because higher elevation may cause higher development costs. Thus, plots with higher elevations are less likely to be
converted. The slope of plots is also an important factor that
influences land use choice, as various studies have shown (Mottet
et al., 2006; York & Munroe, 2010). As far as land conversion for
non-agricultural use is concerned, the volume of earthwork is
positively corrected with the slope of the plots to be developed.
Therefore, the slope of plots has a negative impact on the probability of being converted.
A great deal of research has shown the importance of location
and accessibility in determining land use. According to Johann von
Thünen’s land use theory, land location influences the relative rent
to alternative land uses and, therefore, affects land use patterns
(Polyakov & Zhang, 2008). In a similar vein, accessibility has been
included in the land use decision models by a large body of literature because it represents a cost in land use decisions (Braimoh &
Onishi, 2007). Accessibility can be expressed in terms of any
concept of cost, such as money, time, and so on (Braimoh & Onishi,
2007; Lakes et al., 2009). In numerous studies, the distance to the
specific site was used to denote the accessibility of land (de
Espindola, de Aguiar, Pebesma, Camara, & Fonseca, 2012;
Millington, Perry, & Romero-Calcerrada, 2007; Mottet et al., 2006;
Serneels & Lambin, 2001; Van Doorn & Bakker, 2007). As a matter of
fact, distance would impose some influence on land use costs
(Gellrich, Baur, & Zimmermann, 2007), and land use costs, especially the cost of land development and the transportation cost
relevant with land use, are positively correlated with the distance,
which makes the land price decrease as distance increases.
Previous research has indicated that road development is one
driving force of land use and cover change (de Espindola et al.,
2012; Patarasuk & Binford, 2012). Urbanization also has significant measurable relation with land use, landscape and agricultural
land shrinkage (Huang, et al. 2012; Miller, 2012; Su, Xiao, & Zhang,
2012; Tavares, Pato, & Magalhães, 2012; Verburg, Veldkamp, &
Fresco, 1999). Given the relationship between land use and such
factors as urbanization and road development, variables such as
Road, City and Town were used to measure the location and
accessibility in this study, with Road representing the distance from
grid to road, City and Town representing the distance from the
parcel to the town where the People’s Government of Fuyang
Table 1
Definitions and expected signs for explanatory variables used in the models.
Set Explanatory
variable
Variable definitions Expected signs
d d1 Year dummy variable, d1 ¼ 1 for 2000,
d1 ¼ 0 for otherwise
þ/
d2 Year dummy variable, d2 ¼ 1 for 2001,
d2 ¼ 0 for otherwise
þ/
d3 Year dummy variable, d3 ¼ 1 for 2002,
d3 ¼ 0 for otherwise
þ/
d4 Year dummy variable, d4 ¼ 1 for 2003,
d4 ¼ 0 for otherwise
þ/
d5 Year dummy variable, d5 ¼ 1 for 2004,
d5 ¼ 0 for otherwise
þ/
d6 Year dummy variable, d6 ¼ 1 for 2005,
d6 ¼ 0 for otherwise
þ/
d7 Year dummy variable, d7 ¼ 1 for 2006,
d7 ¼ 0 for otherwise
þ/
d8 Year dummy variable, d8 ¼ 1 for 2007,
d8 ¼ 0 for otherwise
þ/
d9 Year dummy variable, d9 ¼ 1 for 2008,
d9 ¼ 0 for otherwise
þ/
L Planning Dummy variable for basic farmland
protection planning,
Planning ¼ 1 if the grid determined as
basic farmland, and
Planning ¼ 0 for otherwise

X Elevation The elevation of grids (m) 
Slope The slope of grids (%) 
Road Distance from grid to road (m) 
Ynmr Dummy variable for the kind of road,
Ynmr ¼ 1 for major road,
Ynmr ¼ 0 for otherwise
þ
City Distance from grid to city (m) 
Town Distance from grid to town (m) 
Village Distance from grid to village (m) 
Factory Distance from grid to industrial land (m) 
Construction The distance from the grid to nearest
construction land (m)

T. Zhong et al. / Applied Geography 35 (2012) 422e438 427
County is located, and the distance from the parcel to nearest town,
respectively. In consideration of the different weight of different
roads, the variable of Ynmr was generated to denote if the road
closest to the grid is a major road, taking the value of “1” for the
grids close to a major road in Fuyang County and “0” for otherwise.
Because the probability of being converted for the grid close to
major roads would be higher than a parcel far from a major road,
the variable Ynmr is expected to have a positive sign. Plots closer to
the road or town are expected to have relatively higher rent for
non-agriculture use than agriculture use, as well as higher rent
than plots further away. Thus, plots further from the road or town
are less likely to be developed, or will be developed later than those
near the road or town. This leads us to expect the signs for the
variables Road, City and Town to be negative.
As neighboring parcels might have similar properties and be
related, the use of a plot might be influenced by its adjacent parcel’s
use (Cho & Newman, 2005; Zhou & Kockelman, 2008). Therefore,
variables such as Village and Factory were used to represent a plot’s
neighborhood, namely the distance from the parcel to a village or
industrial land, respectively. The variable of Construction was used
to represent the distance of the grid to the nearest construction
land, excluding roads; construction land mainly includes rural
residential land, land used by a factory, land used for water resource
facilities, and so on. These variables, including Village, Factory and
Construction, were added as explanatory variables in the equations
to capture spatial associations. The parcels with higher value for the
distance to nearest construction land are expected to have a smaller
possibility of being converted to other uses. It is the same for the
variables of Village and Factory; these three variables are expected
to have negative signs.
The definitions and expected signs for independent variables are
shown in Table 1, and the descriptive statistics of variables used in
this study are presented in Table 2.
A framework to assess the implementation of planning based on
arable land protection
Effectiveness-based approaches are frequently adopted by
academic research to evaluate land use planning. In other words,
researchers ask whether land use planning is effective, and
understandings of effectiveness are usually used to assess both the
impact of land use planning and the results of its implementation.
There is another issue relevant to assessing land use planning,
namely, whether planning was successful when compared with its
initial goals or objectives. This approach may be termed a goalsbased assessment of the implementation of land use planning.
Effectiveness-based and goals-based assessments were integrated
here into one framework to evaluate the results of the implementation of basic arable land protection planning. It is also
appropriate to combine these two dimensions to assess the impact
of land use planning with regard to cultivated land preservation. In
regard to the goals of farmland protection in land use planning,
there are possible gaps between the goal of cultivated land
protection and the actual results derived from implementing land
use planning. The implementation of land use planning may be
successful or unsuccessful. Similarly, land use planning itself may
be effective or ineffective. Thus, one may conjecture that four
outcomes can exist regarding the implementation of land use
planning when assessments of both implementation and planning
are integrated into one analytic framework (see Fig. 2).
In this study, goals are conceptualized in terms of amounts of
cultivated land converted, and the actual amount of converted
cultivated land was compared with the goal initially set by the land
use planning documents. For the purpose of measuring the success
of cultivated land protection, the smaller the amount of converted
cultivated land, the better the result of planning. We are interested
here in the gaps between the goals of cultivated land conversion
and the actual amount of cultivated land that was converted. The
rules to judge whether land use planning implementation was
successful based on the goals of cultivated land protection are as
follows: implementation is judged successful for those situations in
which the amount of land actually converted is smaller than the
goals for conversion that were set, and unsuccessful for the situations in which the amount of land actually converted was the same
as or larger than the conversion goals. Econometric methods are
used here to evaluate the effectiveness of basic arable land
protection planning given these definitions. These methods were
presented in the previous section in relation to the assessment of
the effectiveness of basic arable land protection planning.
Results and discussions
Estimation result
It is possible that correlations exist among the variables Elevation, Slope, Road, City, Town, Village, Factory, and Construction used
here. The correction coefficients between these variables were
calculated, and the results showed that there is high correlation
between the variables Construction and Village, with a correlation
coefficient of 0.750. Furthermore, the variable Elevation has a high
correlation with the variables Slope, Factory and City, with a correlation coefficient of 0.651, 0.571 and 0.506, respectively. If variables
with high correlation are included in a single model, it will cause
multicollinearity (Wooldridge, 2005). Therefore, different models
including different explanatory variables were estimated and the
variable Elevation was excluded from any models that included
Table 2
Descriptive statistics of variables used in the study.
Explanatory
variable
N Minimum Maximum Mean Std. deviation
Planning 12,106,350 0.00 1.00 0.68 0.47
Elevation 12,106,350 0.00 826.00 71.51 85.53
Slope 12,106,350 0.00 89.90 6.45 7.81
Road 12,106,350 0.00 7577.98 512.71 601.78
Ynmr 12,106,350 0.00 1.00 0.28 0.45
City 12,106,350 0.00 45,710.21 11,832.78 8789.80
Town 12,106,350 0.00 14,451.95 4165.80 2846.04
Village 12,106,350 0.00 1959.21 160.91 156.25
Factory 12,106,350 0.00 5571.69 681.06 652.60
Construction 12,106,350 0.00 1780.71 121.08 116.03
Note: N is the number of grids.
Effect: ineffective(-)
Effect: effective(+)
Goal:(-)
Unsuccessful
Goal:(+)
Successful
Successful and Effective
(SE: +,+)
Successful but Ineffective
(SI: +,-)
Unsuccessful and Ineffective
(UI: -,-)
Unsuccessful but Effective
(UE: -,+)
Fig. 2. The framework to assess the implementation results of land use planning based
on cultivated land protection.
428 T. Zhong et al. / Applied Geography 35 (2012) 422e438
variables with which it shares a high correlation coefficient. The
estimated results are presented in Table 3, which contains two
models that include different variables. Model I includes such
variables as Planning, Slope, Road, Ynmr, City, Town, Village, Factory
and the dummy year variables. Taking into consideration the
correlation between the variables Construction and Village, Model II
includes the variable of Construction instead of Village and Factory.
The two estimated models are shown in Table 3.
The estimated equations perform satisfactorily in terms of
goodness of fit. The two models’ values of the log likelihood at
convergence are 254,266.83 and 259,052.40, respectively. The
likelihood-ratio chi-squared values for the two models are
161,337.96 and 151,766.81, respectively, and the estimated models
are highly significant with p-values of less than 1%. Moreover, all
coefficients are statistically significant at the 1% level. The correct
classification values are 99.57% for both estimated models with
a cut-off of 0.5.
Akaike information criterion (AIC), Schwartz or Bayesian information criterion (BIC), and Pseudo R2 were calculated to assess and
choose models, as presented in Table 3. Model I has the smaller
value of AIC and BIC and larger value of Pseudo R2
, which suggests
that Model I was statistically superior to Model II.
The estimated equations suggest that the conversion of arable
land to other uses is influenced by a plot’s physical elements,
location, neighborhood, and the policy of basic arable land
protection. The estimated coefficients for Slope are significantly
negative and their signs are consistent with expectations. The
negative sign of Slope shows that the slope of a parcel has
a negative influence on cultivated land conversion. The effect of
the independent variable can be interpreted in terms of changes in
odds. The value for the coefficient of Slope in model is 0.0752, the
estimated odds ratio for an increase of 1 m in elevation is 0.9276
(e0.0752), which means that for every increase of 1 percent in
slope gradient, the risk of being converted deceases by a factor of
0.9276. Moreover, the estimated odds ratio for an increase of 10
percent in slope gradient is 0.4714; this indicates that the odds are
expected to change by a factor of 0.4714 for a 10 unit change in
slope gradient.
Based on the estimated equations, the location and accessibility
of plot also have a significant negative influence on arable land’s
conversion to other uses. The coefficient for the independent
variable City (2.3600E05) is of statistical significance in Model I.
This result suggests that for every increase of 1 m, the risk of being
converted decreases by a factor of 0.9999. The estimated odds ratio
for increases of 100 and 1000 m in the distance from plot to town
are 0.9976 and 0.9767, respectively. The coefficient for the independent variable Town (0.0001) is also statistically significant in
Model I, which suggests that for every increase of 1 m, the risk of
being converted decreases by a factor of 0.9999. The estimated odds
ratio for increases of 100 and 1000 m in the distance from plot to
town are 0.9917 and 0.9202, respectively.
The estimated coefficient of Road is also negative and statistically significant. The coefficient of the variable Road is 0.0007;
this indicates that, holding all other variables constant, the odds of
conversion change by 0.9993 for a unit change in the distance
from plot to road. Being 100 m farther from the road decreases the
odds of conversion by a factor of 0.9359. The estimated odds ratios
are 0.8758, 0.7179 and 0.5154, respectively, for increases of 200,
500, and 1000 m in the distance from plot to road. It is also worth
noting that the coefficient of the variable Ynmr is 0.2809, which
means that there was a significant difference between the odds of
being converted for the grids close to major roads and the grids far
from major roads. Compared with the grid far from a major road,
a grid close to a major road has a larger probability of being converted to non-agriculture use. The estimated coefficient for the
variable suggests that the odds of being converted increase by
a factor of 1.3243 (e0.2809) for the grids close to a major road,
holding all other variables constant.
Table 3
Estimated results of logistic discrete-time hazards model for arable land conversion.
Explanatory variable Model I Model II
Coef. Std. err. z P > jzj Coef. Std. err. z P > jzj
d1 0.2429 0.0534 4.5500 0.0000 0.3476 0.0534 6.5000 0.0000
d2 2.6225 0.0350 75.0300 0.0000 2.7272 0.0349 78.0400 0.0000
d3 2.4127 0.0354 68.0800 0.0000 2.5638 0.0354 72.3700 0.0000
d4 3.1595 0.0339 93.1100 0.0000 3.3279 0.0339 98.1300 0.0000
d5 0.6189 0.0729 8.4900 0.0000 0.4292 0.0728 5.8900 0.0000
d6 2.8501 0.0345 82.6200 0.0000 3.0029 0.0345 87.0500 0.0000
d7 1.7662 0.0380 46.5100 0.0000 1.9216 0.0380 50.6200 0.0000
d8 2.3948 0.0356 67.3500 0.0000 2.5750 0.0355 72.4600 0.0000
d9 3.4876 0.0337 103.5400 0.0000 3.6785 0.0337 109.3100 0.0000
Planning 2.2319 0.0123 180.7700 0.0000 2.3607 0.0124 190.9100 0.0000
Slope 0.0752 0.0015 50.6600 0.0000 0.0885 0.0015 58.3200 0.0000
Road 0.0007 0.0000 33.0300 0.0000 0.0012 0.0000 58.6000 0.0000
Ynmr 0.2809 0.0101 27.9100 0.0000 0.4594 0.0099 46.6300 0.0000
City 2.3600E05 0.0000 24.7500 0.0000 3.5900E05 0.0000 38.2600 0.0000
Town 0.0001 0.0000 40.4100 0.0000 0.0001 0.0000 46.3700 0.0000
Village 0.0013 0.0000 48.0900 0.0000
Factory 0.0017 0.0000 77.7400 0.0000
Construction 0.0012 0.0001 21.8300 0.0000
Constant 5.6207 0.0354 158.6900 0.0000 5.9858 0.0351 170.7100 0.0000
Log likelihood 254,266.83 259,052.40
Number of observations 12,106,350 12,106,350
LR chi2 161,337.96 151,766.81
Prob > chi2 0.0000 0.0000
Pseudo R2 0.2408 0.2266
Correctly classified 99.57% 99.57%
AIC 508,569.70 518,138.80
BIC 508,827.20 518,382.10
T. Zhong et al. / Applied Geography 35 (2012) 422e438 429
The neighborhood is another factor influencing arable land
conversion to non-agricultural use. The estimated coefficient for
Factory is 0.0017 and significantly negative. This result suggests
that the risk of being converted is higher for plots near industrial
land than plots far from the industrial land. The coefficient for
Factory suggests that the odds of being converted decrease by
a factor of 0.9983 for an increase of 1 m in distance between a plot
and industrial land. The estimated odds ratios are 0.9828, 0.8405,
0.4194, 0.1759, and 0.0309, respectively, for increases of 10, 100,
500, 1000, and 2000 m. Another explanatory variable, Village, (the
distance from a grid to a village) is also statistically significant. It is
expected that there is a larger possibility of being converted to nonagricultural use for those plots that are near a village than those far
from a village. However, the estimated coefficient of Village is
significantly positive and, thus, not in concordance with expectations. When compared with Factory, which has a significantly
negative estimated coefficient in line with expectations, this result
appears strange. However, this result reflects the actual circumstances in Fuyang. China’s rural development has experienced an
episode of universal transition since 2000 (Long, Zou, Pykett, & Li,
2011) and rapid urbanization and industrialization in China have
caused the phenomenon of “village-hollowing” (Long, Li, Liu,
Woods, & Zou, 2012), which has caused the extensive use of rural
construction land. The policy of central and local governments,
especially local governments’ policy, has responded to these transitions. Policies accelerating the urbanization of Hangzhou, which
is a prefecture-level city and has jurisdiction over Fuyang County,
led to different land use policies and agricultural land conversion
permits. The document “Circular on Some Policies about Accelerating the Progress of Urbanization” was issued by the Zhejiang
Provincial Government in September 2000. This circular encouraged rural residential concentration and stated that core towns
have priority in using the quota of arable land conversion. Actually,
some other cities in Zhejiang Province had implemented a plan for
dispersing rural residential concentrations before this circular was
issued (Skinner et al., 2001). Another policy file, “Some Policies on
Experimental Measures to Speed up the Reform of Core Towns” was
issued by the government of Hangzhou in December 2001. This
publication also guaranteed the core towns’ priority in using the
arable land conversion quota. The quota for converting arable land
to construction use is 1160 ha over 14 years, which is allocated by
the land use plan of Hangzhou for the term from 1997 to 2010. Due
to these policies, there is little likelihood that farmers will receive
permission from the local agency for land administration to convert
arable land to non-agricultural uses near their current villages,
a situation which most likely accounts for the positive coefficient
for Village.
The estimated coefficients for year dummy variables are all of
statistical significance. Regarding the coefficients of the dummy
variables for the years 2000 to 2008, their exponentials represent
the odds ratio of conversion in a given year compared with the year
1999. The coefficients of the dummy variables are positive except
for 2004, which suggest that the odds of arable land being converted were greater in 2000, 2001, 2002, 2003, 2005, 2006, 2007,
and 2008 than they were in 1999, and the odds of being converted
were smaller in 2004 than in 1999. This can be explained by
a change of land use policy of China, which saw more rigorous land
use conversion regulations in the year 2004 (Zhong, Huang, Zhang,
& Wang, 2011).
The effectiveness of basic farmland protection planning
Effectiveness of basic farmland protection planning
The estimated coefficient of the variable Planning was used to
judge whether basic farmland protection planning had been
effective in decreasing arable land conversion. If the estimated
coefficients of Planning are consistent with its expected sign and
statistically significant, the conclusion would be that the basic
farmland protection plan had been effective in saving arable land
from being developed for non-agricultural use. In other words,
basic arable land protection planning can be judged effective if
there are significant differences between the odds of being converted for basic arable land and ordinary, non-basic, arable land,
and ineffective if there is no significant difference. The estimated
coefficient for the variable of Planning is negative and statistically
significant, thus consistent with the expected sign. The significantly
negative coefficient for Planning indicates that there was a significant difference between the odds of being converted between basic
arable land and ordinary, non-basic arable land. Compared with
ordinary arable land, there is a smaller probability of basic arable
land being converted to non-agriculture use. The estimated coefficient for the variable of Planning is 2.2319, which suggests that
the odds of being converted decrease by a factor of 0.1073 (e2.2319)
for basic arable land, holding all other variables constant. In other
words, the odds of being converted decrease by 89.27%
(e2.2319  1). In terms of farmland preservation, the odds of not
being converted increase by a factor of 9.32 (1/e2.2319), namely
increase 832% (1/e2.2319  1), holding all other variables constant.
The result shows that the basic arable land protection planning
used and its relevant policies were effective in decreasing arable
land loss. Because the larger absolute value of the negative coefficient of the variable Planning means a larger decrease in the odds of
being converted, we can argue that basic arable land protection was
effective in preserving arable land.
Degree of protection of basic farmland protection planning to arable
land
The estimated Model I was used to compute the probability of
arable land being converted. The probability of being converted was
computed with and without the basic arable land protection policy
in place. The ROC curve (shown in Fig. 3) is the plot of sensitivity
versus 1  specificity for all cut-off values (Hosmer & Lemeshow,
2000). The area under the ROC curve is 0.9145, which is considered excellent discrimination according to the general rules
(Hosmer & Lemeshow, 2000). The plot of sensitivity versus specificity versus all possible cut-points is shown in Fig. 4.
The summary of sensitivity, specificity, and the Youden index
based on Model I is presented in Table 4. The cut-point was chosen
based on the Youden index. The Youden index reaches its
Fig. 3. The ROC curve for Model I.
430 T. Zhong et al. / Applied Geography 35 (2012) 422e438
maximum at the cut-point of 0.0044. The specificity is very high at
the cut-point of 0.5 with the value of 100%; however, the sensitivity
is 0.00%. The sensitivity rises as the cut-points decrease. At the
optimal point, the specificity is still high with a value of 84.56% and
sensitivity improves to 83.49%. The rate of correct classification is
84.56 percent for the cut-point of 0.0044. The classification table is
presented as Table 5. A value of sensitivity of 83.49% means that the
proportion of correctly classified events is 83.49% and the value of
specificity of 84.56% indicates that the proportion of correctly
classified non-events is 84.56%.
Therefore, the value of 0.0044 was used as the threshold to
derive the dichotomous variable. The estimated probabilities were
compared with this threshold. If the estimated probability exceeds
0.0044, then the derived variable is equal to 1; namely, the predicted probability was viewed as the occurrence of conversion.
Otherwise, its value is 0.
The types of estimated probabilities were computed, one of
which is the estimated probabilities with the variable Planning’s
value at 1, and another is with the variable Planning’s value at 0. The
estimated probabilities with and without basic arable land
protection were compared with 0.0044. If the estimated probability
exceeds 0.0044 for a grid, then the grid is counted as conversion.
Predicted conversion rather than the actual conversion was used, so
that model error present in the predictions without basic arable
land protection in place is counted in the predictions with basic
arable land protection policy in place. Therefore, these grids are
counted as the effect of basic arable land protection, whose estimated probability without basic arable land protection exceeds
0.0044 and estimated probability with basic arable land protection
is less than 0.0044. N1 represents the number of grids counted by
this means for the effect of basic arable land protection in Table 6.
However, conversion from arable land to construction use is not
a repeated event for a grid. If a grid is predicted as a conversion for
several years, all but the first year of predicted conversion were
dropped. N2 represents the number of the grids counted by this
means for the effect of basic arable land protection in Table 6. The
area saved by the basic arable land protection is calculated as
follows:
A1 ¼ N1  15  15
104
A2 ¼ N2  15  15
104
The effects of basic arable land protection are shown in Table 6.
The value of N1 is larger than that of N2 except for 2001, and it is
same for A1 and A2. Given that the conversion of arable land to
other uses is not a repeated event, it is more reasonable for the
estimated number and the area of grids saved by basic arable land
protection policy to be represented by A2 and N2 than A1 and N1. As
shown in Table 6, the estimated number and area of the grids saved
by arable land protection policy are different for every year. The
estimated area of conversion is the largest in 2001. Phenomena
such as industrial park setup, town sprawl, and transportation
development were observed from 1999 to 2003 (Zhong et al., 2011).
New plants, road construction, and town development changed
these variables’ values, which include the variables Road, City, Town
and Factory in those years. These changes influenced the predicted
probabilities of the grids and caused fluctuations between the
estimated conversion areas of arable land from 2000 to 2008. The
ratios of the predicted conversion grids to the total grids of arable
land fluctuated between 2000 and 2008, the highest is 40.92% in
2001, the lowest is 0.05% in 2006 (except for 2004) and the average
is 5.83%. The relative effect was also computed and is shown as NR
and NNR in Table 6. The relative effect is the ratio of the number of
grids counted as the effect of basic arable land protection to the
predicted number of conversion grids without basic arable land
protection. Its value fluctuated from 2000 to 2008, with the highest
fluctuation of 90.79% occurring in 2006, the lowest of 36.58%
occurring in 2000 (the exception being 2004) with an average of
72.30%. This result also suggests that the policy of protecting basic
arable land was effective in Fuyang County.
Fig. 4. The plot of sensitivity versus specificity versus all possible cut-points in Model I.
Table 4
Summary of sensitivity, specificity and Youden index based on model using a cutpoint of 0.0030e0.0050 in increments of 0.0001.
Cut-point Sensitivity Specificity Youden index
0.0030 88.09% 79.78% 67.87%
0.0031 87.68% 80.26% 67.94%
0.0032 87.27% 80.71% 67.98%
0.0033 86.85% 81.13% 67.98%
0.0034 86.44% 81.54% 67.98%
0.0035 86.05% 81.91% 67.96%
0.0036 85.72% 82.27% 67.99%
0.0037 85.37% 82.62% 67.99%
0.0038 85.04% 82.94% 67.98%
0.0039 84.74% 83.25% 67.99%
0.0040 84.46% 83.53% 67.99%
0.0041 84.20% 83.81% 68.01%
0.0042 83.93% 84.07% 68.00%
0.0043 83.68% 84.32% 68.00%
0.0044 83.49% 84.56% 68.05%
0.0045 83.25% 84.79% 68.04%
0.0046 83.01% 85.01% 68.02%
0.0047 82.79% 85.21% 68.00%
0.0048 82.53% 85.41% 67.94%
0.0049 82.27% 85.60% 67.87%
0.0050 81.99% 85.78% 67.77%
Table 5
Classification table based on Model I using a cut-point of 0.0044.
Classified Observed
Y ¼ 1
converted
Y ¼ 0
unconverted
Total
Y ¼ 1 43,357 1,860,973 1,904,330
Y ¼ 0 8576 10,193,444 10,202,020
Total 51,933 12,054,417 12,106,350
Note: the number is the number of grids.
T. Zhong et al. / Applied Geography 35 (2012) 422e438 431
Policies and institutions ensuring the effectiveness of basic arable
land protection planning
Basic farmland protection planning per se does not compel
compliance; it is, rather, farmland protection policies along with
basic farmland protection plan enforcement that makes planning
effective. Furthermore, relevant laws, regulations, and policies are
usually integrated into land use planning, and local governments
usually take these laws, regulations, and policies from the text of
land use planning documents created by higher lever governments for their land use planning. Moreover, basic arable land
protection is a nation-wide issue, and the central and provincial
governments frequently issue relevant policies that require
governments at all levels to enforce basic arable land protection.
China has a top-down land use planning system, and some
objectives of local land use planning are restricted by higher-level
land use planning on local governments. The objectives of arable
land protection and basic arable land protection are restricted by
higher-level land use planning. The amount of arable land retention and basic arable land preservation in land use planning are
required to be not less than the amount assigned by the next
higher-level government’s land use planning decisions. Local land
use planning has the right to decide the spatial distribution of
basic arable land and concrete amounts based on higher-level land
use planning. All these factors have made it difficult to completely
and comprehensively understand or explain the effect of arable
land protection planning without mention of relevant institutions
and policies.
Relevant laws regarding basic arable land protection
As far as policies for farmland protection are concerned, there
are two principal laws governing arable land protection in China
(Lichtenberg & Ding, 2008). One is the Land Administration Law,
issued in 1986. This law has been revised three times, in 1988, 1998,
and 2004. The revisions in 1988 and 2004 had nothing to do with
farmland protection; however, farmland protection is the most
important issue in the 1998 revision. According to the Land
Administration Law of 1986, county-level, prefecture-level,
province-level, and the central government have the right to
approve the conversion and expropriation of arable land to nonagricultural use. The county-level government has the right to
approve the conversion and expropriation application of arable
land of less than 3 mu (1 mu ¼ 1/15 ha), the province-level
government has the right to approve the conversion and expropriation application of arable land larger than 3 mu and less than
1000 mu, and the rights of prefecture-level government are
determined by its province-level government. Conversions of
arable land larger than 1000 mu should obtain approval from the
State Council. The Land Administration Law was revised in 1998
and enacted in 1999; this revised edition is commonly called the
New Land Administration Law in China. This revision adjusted the
allocation of rights for approval of arable land conversion and
expropriation. The New Land Administration Law created a new
system called land use regulation, and classified land into three
types, namely agricultural land, construction land, and unused
land. Arable land, grass land and wood land are classified as agricultural land. Conversion of agricultural land to construction use
must be approved, as required by Article 44 of the Land Administration Law.
There are two types of land ownership in the Chinese land
tenure system, namely, collective ownership and state ownership.
Arable land is either collectively owned land or state-owned, with
the vast majority collectively owned. According to the Constitution
of the People’s Republic of China and the Land Administration Law,
rural and suburban land belongs to village collectives in general,
rural collectives have the authority to allocate farmland to households, and farm households have the use rights of arable land for
a term of 30 years. Although county-level government has the right
to approve agricultural land conversion, the New Administration
Law requires that arable land be expropriated before it is converted
to construction use if the arable land to be converted is collectively
owned. The rights allocation of arable land acquisition or expropriation is defined by Article 45; this assignment of rights was
termed the “recentralization”of land management in China (Wu,
2009). As mentioned above, the local governments below
province-level have no rights to approve arable land expropriation.
The province-level governments have the right to approve ordinary
arable land expropriation less than 35 ha (525 mu) and other land
less than 70 ha. These conversions require approval from the State
Council, including conversion of basic arable land, ordinary arable
land expropriation exceeding 35 ha, and other collectively owned
land exceeding 70 ha.
The data mentioned above indicate that basic arable land
protection planning reduced the occupation of arable land to
a remarkable degree. The change in the arable land protection
regime provides a good explanation for this. One of the bottlenecks
is the adjustment of approval rights for basic arable land conversion. The central government centralized approval rights over basic
arable land conversion by revising the Land Administration Law.
Since 1999, when the new Land Administration Law came into
effect, any conversion of basic arable land to non-agricultural use
must obtain the permission of the State Council. This adjustment of
approval rights over basic arable land conversion makes it more
difficult to obtain approval for basic arable land conversion.
Table 6
The estimated effects of basic arable land protection.
Year N1 N2 A1 A2 NW Relative effect
NR NNR N1/NR (%) N2/NNR (%)
1999 0 0 0.00 0.00 7467 7467 0.00 0.00
2000 8563 5975 192.67 134.44 23,653 16,332 36.20 36.58
2001 501,638 501,638 11,286.86 11,286.86 735,677 712,046 68.19 70.45
2002 483,373 11,262 10,875.89 253.40 698,127 14,119 69.24 79.76
2003 532,818 101,588 11,988.41 2285.73 861,906 122,349 61.82 83.03
2004 31 0 0.70 0.00 178 0 17.42 e
2005 567,763 13,752 12,774.67 309.42 837,265 17,162 67.81 80.13
2006 372,916 552 8390.61 12.42 541,055 608 68.92 90.79
2007 531,727 2211 11,963.86 49.75 740,824 2596 71.78 85.17
2008 484,713 69,192 10,906.04 1556.82 941,720 84,046 51.47 82.33
Total 3,483,542 706,170 78,379.70 15,888.83 5,387,872 976,725 64.66 72.30
Note: NW is the predicted number of conversion grids without basic arable land protection; NR is the predicted number of conversion grids without basic arable land
protection, including repeated occurrences; NNR is the predicted number of conversion grids without basic arable land protection dropping repeated occurrences.
432 T. Zhong et al. / Applied Geography 35 (2012) 422e438
In addition to the adjustment of approval rights of arable land
conversion and expropriation, the New Land Administration Law
also raised the standard of arable land expropriation in Article 47.
According to Article 47, compensation for land expropriated
includes land compensation, compensation for resettlement and
compensation for attachments to or green crops on the land. The
land compensation is 6e10 times the average output value of the
three years preceding the expropriation of the cultivated land. The
compensation for resettlement of each agricultural person is 4e6
times the average annual output value of the three years, and the
resettlement compensation per ha shall not exceed 15 times the
average annual output value. The compensation for resettlement
may be increased with the approval of the people’s governments of
provinces, autonomous regions, and municipalities in situations in
which the land compensation and resettlement compensation paid
are not enough to maintain the farmers’ original standard of living.
In addition, the combined total of land compensation and resettlement compensation shall not exceed 30 times the average
output value. Furthermore, the Decision on the Deepening Reform
and Tightening Land Administration issued by State Council in
2004 required that the expropriation of basic arable land should be
compensated according to the highest standards for land
compensation and resettlement compensation. Those compensation standards are much lower in the Land Administration Law
passed in 1986, when the standards for land compensation and
resettlement compensation were 3e6 times and 2e3 times the
average annual output value, respectively. The maximum for
resettlement compensation per ha is 10 times, and the maximum of
the combined total of land compensation and resettlement
compensation is 20 times that contained in the Land Administration Law from 1986.
In addition to the New Land Administration Law, there is
a special law on basic arable land protection entitled “Basic Arable
Land Protection Regulation”. This law was passed in 1994 and
revised in 1999 due to the Land Administration Law revision in
1998. Article 9 of the Basic Arable Land Protection Regulation and
Article 34 of the New Land Administration Law require that the area
of basic land shall account for over 80% of the cultivated land in
provinces, autonomous regions, and municipalities. The area of
basic arable land in one region is assigned by its higher-level
government, usually as a result of the master land use planning
of its higher-level government. The quota of basic arable land for
Fuyang County is 24,773 ha as assigned by the Master Land Use
Planning of Hangzhou City from 1997 to 2010, representing 84.46%
of the area of Fuyang County’s arable land in 1996. Article 14 of the
Basic Arable Land Protection Regulation requires that there be no
net decrease or loss of basic arable land during the planning period.
According to Article 15 of the Basic Arable Land Protection Regulation and Article 11 of the Basic Arable Land Protection Regulation
of Zhejiang Province, only some special conversions for nonagricultural purposes could be approved. These include arable
land conversion for the purpose of military installations, energy
purposes, communications, water conservancy, and other infrastructure projects approved by the State Council and the government of Zhejiang Province.
Also required is that the basic arable land protection zone be
designated when town-level and county-level master land use
planning is conducted in accordance with Article 8 of the Basic
Arable Land Protection Regulation. Furthermore, Article 11 of the
Basic Arable Land Protection Regulation requires that local
governments set up on-site posts demarcating the basic arable land
protection zone.
Changes of policies relevant for basic arable land protection
In addition to adjusting the allocation of arable land conversion
approval rights, the Chinese central government has, since 1999,
steeped up its supervision of local land use and local governments’
administration, in response to illegal land use and local governments’ passive reactions. Specifically, new technology was used in
the supervision of land use and its administration. Illegal farmland
conversion occurs in China’s urban periphery that bypasses the
process of land expropriation approval (Wang & Scott, 2008).
Because local divisions of land administration departments had
reacted passively to this illegal land conversion prior to 1999, when
the new Land Administration Law was put into place, the Ministry
of Land and Resources of the People’s Republic of China
Table 7
Policies regarding basic arable land protection in China issued between 1999 and 2008.
Year Name of policy Issued by
1999 Basic Arable Land Protection Regulation (Revised in 1998) State Council
1999 Circular on Enforcing “the Basic Arable Land Protection Regulation” and
Reinforcing basic Arable Land Protection
Ministry of Land and Resources and
Ministry of Agriculture
2000 Circular on Inspection of Land Law Enforcement Based on Remote Sensing Technology Ministry of Land and Resources
2000 Circular on Inspection of Land Law Enforcement Based on Remote Sensing Data of 2000 Ministry of Land and Resources
2000 Measures for the acceptance of Basic Arable Protection District Readjustment Ministry of Land and Resources
2001
2002 Circular on Inspection of Land Law Enforcement Based on Remote Sensing Data of 2001 Ministry of Land and Resources
2003 Circular on Strictly Prohibiting Conversion of Basic Arable Land to Non-agricultural Us Ministry of Land and Resources
2003 Circular on Strengthening Farmland Protection Ministry of Land and Resources
2004 Circular on Inspection on Basic Arable Land Protection Ministry of Land and Resources and
Ministry of Agriculture
2004 Urgent Notice on Land Market Consolidation & Tightening Land Administration General Office of the State Council
2004 Requirement on the Correction of the Problems in Basic Arable Land Protection Ministry of Land and Resources
2004 Decision on the Deepening Reform and Tightening Land Administration The State Council
2004 Circular on the Reform of Land and Resources Administrative System below the Province-level The State Council
2005 Assessment Approach on Province-level Government’s Target Responsibility of Farmland Protection General Office of the State Council
2005 Circular on Setting up Demonstration Zone of Basic Arable Land Ministry of Land and Resources
2005 Circular on the Fifth Inspection of Land Law Enforcement Based on Remote Sensing Data Ministry of Land and Resources
2005 Requirements on Enforcing Basic Arable Land Protection Ministry of Land and Resources
2006 Circular on Setting up the System of Supervision of State Land General Office of the State Council
2006 Circular on the Sixth Inspection of Land Law Enforcement Based on Remote Sensing Data Ministry of Land and Resources
2007 Circular on the Seventh Inspection of Land Law Enforcement Based on Remote Sensing Data Ministry of Land and Resources
2008 Urgent Circular on Administration of dynamic balance of Arable Land Ministry of Land and Resources
2008 Circular on the eighth Inspection of Land Law Enforcement Based on Remote Sensing Data Ministry of Land and Resources
Source: summarized by authors.
T. Zhong et al. / Applied Geography 35 (2012) 422e438 433
implemented a new supervision method in 2000 to inspect local
land use and local governments’ land use administration. This
supervision included inspecting land law enforcement by using
remote sensing technology and monitoring the land use dynamic.
Since 2001 the inspections and monitoring have been carried out
once a year. One of the key points of land law enforcement
inspection is the conversion of arable land, especially basic arable
land. The adoption of remote sensing technology has brought
pressure on local governments (Ho & Lin, 2004a), and the inspections of land law enforcement have heightened the central
government’s authority because the accuracy of land use data,
especially data on illegal land use, has been greatly improved. The
Ministry of Land and Resources of the People’s Republic of China
issued the “Circular on Strictly Prohibiting Conversion of Basic
Arable Land to Non-agricultural Use” in August of 2003, and
launched a special inspection on basic arable land protection in
February of 2004.
Furthermore, farmland protection was integrated into local
government performance assessment, a development which has
forced local governments to put more effort into controlling
farmland loss. The General Office of the State Council of the People’s
Republic of China issued a circular entitled “Assessment Approach
on Province-level Government’s Target Responsibility of Farmland
Protection” in 2005; basic arable land protection is an important
item in the quantitative performance assessment system outlined
in this circular. This assessment system has exerted pressure on
local governments and their chief executives instead of ministries
and commissions under the State Council, as had been the case in
the past.
Last but not least, the structural reform of governance and
inspection of land use administration has raised the level of basic
farmland protection planning enforcement and compliance. The
“Circular on the Reform of Land and Resources Administrative
System below the Province-level” issued by the State Council in
Fig. 5. Annual conversion of arable land between 1999 and 2000.
434 T. Zhong et al. / Applied Geography 35 (2012) 422e438
2004 led to the readjustment of local land and resources administrative systems. The administrative rights over land, resources,
and construction land use approval have been concentrated. In
addition to these developments, a new regime entitled the land
supervisor system was set up by State Council of China and a new
inspection organization, the Supervisor of State Land, was established in 2007 and placed directly under the Ministry of Land and
Resources. One of the tasks of the Supervisor of State Land is
supervising the province-level efforts regarding arable land
protection, especially basic arable land protection. These changes,
listed in Table 7, have made basic arable land planning more
effective and saved much arable land in comparison with the older
policy that neglected basic arable land protection. Changes to
relevant policies, combined with the implementation of a basic
arable land protection plan, caused fluctuations in arable land
conversion between 1999 and 2008, as illustrated in Fig. 5.
Comprehensive evaluation of basic arable land implementation
Using the combined framework of effectiveness-based and
goals-based assessment, this paper evaluated the results of
implementing basic arable land protection planning. The results of
the assessment, based on effectiveness criteria provided in the
previous sections, indicated that basic arable land protection
planning and its implementation created a positive effect, namely,
basic arable land protection planning and its implementation did
reduce the loss of arable land in Fuyang County. The quota of arable
land conversion to non-agricultural use is 1160 ha for the years
from 1997 to 2010, which was the objective of arable land
conversion control. There were approximately 1169 ha of arable
land converted to non-agricultural use between 1999 and 2008,
which exceeded the control target of arable land conversion in the
planning. This result belongs in the category of unsuccessful but
effective planning when we combine considerations of both
effectiveness-based and goals-based assessment dimension. This
result looks strange, but there are several root causes for this result.
First, the top-down administrative system of land use planning
leaves local government less space for its own arable land conversion plan. The bottom-up method of land use planning, especially
for arable land protection planning, has been almost completely
ignored in the current system of arable land protection planning
and administration. The lower-level governments are required to
accept the quota of arable land conversion arranged by their next
higher-level government, which means lower-level governments
can set a goal of arable land conversion less than the quota set by its
next higher-level government rather than exceeding the quota.
Local government can determine the spatial distribution of basic
land protection and the arable land to be converted. Second, there
is a gap in interests regarding land administration, especially arable
land protection, between the local and central governments. Local
governments emphasize interests in urbanization, industrialization, and economic growth rather than food security. However, the
central government must balance economic growth and food
security. Local governments are tempted to convert arable land to
non-agricultural use to promote local economic growth rather than
preserving arable land. Faced with these impulses on the part of
local governments, the central government has responded in the
ways mentioned above. However, China’s central government has
focused on the tools of command and control rather than developing tools associated with positive incentives and compensation.
These two factors have increased the likelihood of planning failure
with regard to arable land protection. Third, the system for evaluating local government cadres’ performance and promotion has
made it impossible for local governments to ignore higher-level
and central governments’ requirements regarding arable land
protection. The promotion of local government officials is in the
hands of the relevant higher-level governments, and the central
government has powerful influence over local government officials’
promotion at and above the prefecture-level, especially officials’
promotions at the province-level. This governance structure over
cadre promotion and arable land protection has forced local
governments to balance the demand for arable land conversion
created by local economic growth with arable land protection
objectives required by the higher-level and central governments.
These circumstances create an effective but not successful regime
of arable land protection.
Conclusions
The empirical results suggest that basic arable land planning did
reduce the conversion of arable land to non-agricultural use. The
likelihood of conversion of arable land in basic arable land
protection district is notably different from that of arable land
outside the basic arable land protection district. The results from
the estimated model describing the arable land conversion of
Fuyang County indicates that the odds of being converted
decreased by 89 percent for basic arable land, compared with the
arable land outside the basic arable land protection district, namely
ordinary arable land. On average, the conversion of arable land
decreased by 72 percent between 2000 and 2008 from what
otherwise would be expected, due to the basic arable land
protection planning that was in place in Fuyang County.
There are two pillars for the effectiveness of basic arable land
protection planning, and three types of institutional transition have
fostered positive effects. First, the adjustment of approval rights for
arable land conversion allocation between the central government
and local governments is the most important item for the effectiveness of basic arable land protection planning. The second pillar
is the new technology used by the central government to inspect
land use and land administration of local governments, especially
the annual land law enforcement inspection based on remote
sensing technology carried out by the Ministry of Land and
Resources of China since 2000. Furthermore, three types of institutional transition or change have fostered the positive effect of
basic arable land protection planning. One is the raising of the
standard of arable land expropriation, which has increased the cost
of occupation of arable land for non-agricultural uses. Performance
assessment change is the second transition, and the setup of the
regime called the Assessment on Province-level Government’s
Target Responsibility of Farmland Protection has made local
governments pay attention to not only local economic growth but
also arable land protection. The last institutional transition is
governance structure reform of land administration in the form of
the readjustment of the local land and resources administrative
system in 2004 and the creation of a land supervisor system in
2007; the first mission and policy goal of the latter is to urge local
government to pay more attention to arable land protection.
These institutional changes to the Chinese farmland protection
regime drive the system in a different direction from those of many
countries with private ownership of land, such as the United States.
Market-based policy tools have been highlighted and encouraged
in the US, for example, transaction of development rights (TDR),
purchase of development rights (PDR), farmland trusts, and so on.
However, China has strengthened the central government’s
supervision of local governments’ land administration and tightened up the approval rights of farmland conversion. In particular,
the technical support for the central government’s supervision of
local governments’ land administration has been gradually
strengthened over the past decade and is expected to be more
powerful and effective in the near future. This appears to be
T. Zhong et al. / Applied Geography 35 (2012) 422e438 435
a deviation from the more general market-based reform taking
place in China’s economy; however, it is an appropriate choice for
China’s land administration given consideration of two critical
differences. One is China’s public ownership of land, which has
made local government the de facto owner of urban land. Farmers
and farm households are just the users, not the owners, of farmland
(Cai, 2003; Ho, 2001), with usage rights of 30 years with the leasing
arrangement between farm households and their village collectives. Another is the local governments’ dual roles of administrator
and developer in land development (Lichtenberg & Ding, 2009),
giving local governments and village leaders the impetus to
develop farmland. China’s central government has focused on
strengthening the supervision of local governments’ land use and
land use administration to preserve farmland due to these factors. It
is expected that basic farmland protection planning will be more
effective in the future when one takes into account the Chinese
system of land ownership and institutional change in the land
administration regime.
The results derived from an integrated analysis framework for
assessing planning implementation lead to more insightful analysis
combining the two dimensions of effectiveness-base and goalsbased assessment. Although the basic arable land protection
planning was deemed effective, it was not deemed successful in
comparison with the objective of arable land protection. Three key
and interweaving causes made these results unsuccessful but
effective; these causes include the lack of combination of top-down
and bottom-up administration in the system of land use planning,
unbalanced policies between command-control and incentives, the
gap of interests regarding land administration between the local
governments and the central government, and the system of local
government cadres’ promotion and performance evaluations.
Acknowledgments
This contribution was financed by the National Natural Science
Foundation of China (No. 41271190, No. 40801063, No. 40971104,
No. 41101160 and No. 41201573), and A Project Funded by the
Priority Academic Program Development of Jiangsu Higher
Education Institutions. The authors are grateful to anonymous
reviewers and the editor Dr. Jay D. Gatrell, whose constructive
comments, suggestions and help have greatly contributed to
enhancing the manuscript.
References
Agarwal, R., Metiku, T., Tegegne, G. G., Light, R. P., Bunaye, Z., Bekele, D. M., et al.
(2008). Diagnosing hypertension by intradialytic blood pressure recordings.
Clinical Journal of the American Society of Nephrology, 3(5), 1364e1372.
Alphan, H. (2003). Land-use change and urbanization of Adana, Turkey. Land
Degradation & Development, 14(6), 575e586.
An, L., & Brown, D. G. (2008). Survival analysis in land change science: integrating
with GIScience to address temporal complexities. Annals of the Association of
American Geographers, 98(2), 323e344.
Braimoh, A. K., & Onishi, T. (2007). Spatial determinants of urban land use change in
Lagos, Nigeria. Land Use Policy, 24(2), 502e515.
Bramley, G. (1993). The impact of land-use planning and tax subsidies on the supply
and price of housing in Britain. Urban Studies, 30(1), 5e30.
Bureau of Statistics of Hangzhou City, NBS Survey Office in Hanghou, & Hangzhou
Bureau of Socio-economic Survey. (2011). Hangzhou statistical yearbook 2011.
China Statistics Press.
Cai, Y. (2003). Collective ownership or cadres’ ownership? The non-agricultural use
of farmland in China. The China Quarterly, 175, 662e680.
Chen, J. (2007). Rapid urbanization in China: a real challenge to soil protection and
food security. Catena, 69(1), 1e15.
Chen, Z. J., Chen, J., Shi, P. J., & Tamura, M. (2003). An IHS-based change detection
approach for assessment of urban expansion impact on arable land loss in
China. International Journal of Remote Sensing, 24(6), 1353e1360.
Cho, S. H., & Newman, D. H. (2005). Spatial analysis of rural land development.
Forest Policy and Economics, 7(5), 732e744.
Coomes, O. T., Grimard, F., & Burt, G. J. (2000). Tropical forests and shifting cultivation: secondary forest fallow dynamics among traditional farmers of the
Peruvian Amazon. Ecological Economics, 32(1), 109e124.
Daniels, T. (1990). Using LESA in a purchase of development rights program. Journal
of Soil and Water Conservation, 45(6), 617e621.
Daniels, T. L. (1990). Policies to preserve prime farmland in the U.S.A.: a comment.
Journal of Rural Studies, 6(3), 331e336.
Daniels, T. L., & Nelson, A. C. (1986). Is Oregon farmland preservation program
working. Journal of the American Planning Association, 52(1), 22e32.
De Pinto, A., & Nelson, G. C. (2009). Land use change with spatially explicit data:
a dynamic approach. Environmental & Resource Economics, 43(2), 209e229.
DeMers, M. N. (1988). Policy implications of LESA factor and weight determination
in Douglas County, Kansas. Land Use Policy, 5(4), 408e418.
Demers, M. N. (1989a). The importance of site assessment in land-use planning e a reexamination of the SCS LESA model. Applied Geography, 9(4), 287e303.
Demers, M. N. (1989b). Knowledge acquisition for GIS automation of the SCS LESA
model e an empirical-study. AI Applications in Natural Resource Management,
3(4), 12e22.
Deng, F. F., & Huang, Y. Q. (2004). Uneven land reform and urban sprawl in China:
the case of Beijing. Progress in Planning, 61, 211e236.
Doos, B. R. (2002). Population growth and loss of arable land. Global Environmental
Change-Human and Policy Dimensions, 12(4), 303e311.
Dung, E. J., & Sugumaran, R. (2005). Development of an agricultural land evaluation
and site assessment (LESA) decision support tool using remote sensing and
geographic information system. Journal of Soil and Water Conservation, 60(5),
228e235.
Eric Vittinghoff, S. C. S., Glidden, D. V., & McCulloch, C. E. (2005). Regression methods
in biostatistics linear, logistic, survival, and repeated measures models. New York:
Springer, c2005.
Esparza, A. X., & Carruthers, J. I. (2000). Land use planning and exurbanization in
the rural mountain west e evidence from Arizona. Journal of Planning Education
and Research, 20(1), 23e36.
de Espindola, G. M., de Aguiar, A. P. D., Pebesma, E., Camara, G., & Fonseca, L. (2012).
Agricultural land use dynamics in the Brazilian Amazon based on remote
sensing and census data. Applied Geography, 32(2), 240e252.
Fazal, S. (2000). Urban expansion and loss of agricultural land e a GIS based study
of Saharanpur City, India. Environment and Urbanization, 12(2), 133e149.
Ferguson, C. A., Bowen, R. L., & Kahn, M. A. (1991). A statewide LESA system for
Hawaii. Journal of Soil and Water Conservation, 46(4), 263e267.
Firman, T. (2000). Rural to urban land conversion in Indonesia during boom and
bust periods. Land Use Policy, 17(1), 13e20.
Foster, J. H., & Macconnell, W. (1977). Agricultural land-use change in Massachusetts
1951e1971. Massachusetts Agricultural Experiment Station Bulletin, 640, 3e54.
Gao, J., Liu, Y., & Chen, Y. (2006). Land cover changes during agrarian restructuring
in Northeast China. Applied Geography, 26(3-4), 312e322.
Gellrich, M., Baur, P., & Zimmermann, N. E. (2007). Natural forest regrowth as
a proxy variable for agricultural land abandonment in the Swiss mountains:
a spatial statistical model based on geophysical and socio-economic variables.
Environmental Modeling & Assessment, 12(4), 269e278.
Geoghegan, J., Villar, S. C., Klepeis, P., Mendoza, P. M., Ogneva-Himmelberger, Y.,
Chowdhury, R. R., et al. (2001). Modeling tropical deforestation in the southern
Yucatan peninsular region: comparing survey and satellite data. Agriculture
Ecosystems & Environment, 85(1-3), 25e46.
Hein, S., & Weiskittel, A. (2010). Cutpoint analysis for models with binary outcomes:
a case study on branch mortality. European Journal of Forest Research, 129(4),
585e590.
Ho, P. (2001). Who owns China’s land? Policies, property rights and deliberate
institutional ambiguity. China Quarterly, 166, 394e421.
Ho, S. P. S., & Lin, G. C. S. (2004a). Converting land to nonagricultural use in China’s
coastal provinces e evidence from Jiangsu. Modern China, 30(1), 81e112.
Ho, S. P. S., & Lin, G. C. S. (2004b). Non-agricultural land use in post-reform China.
China Quarterly, 179, 758e781.
Hoobler, B. M., Vance, G. F., Hamerlinck, J. D., Munn, L. C., & Hayward, J. A. (2003).
Applications of land evaluation and site assessment (LESA) and a geographic
information system (GIS) in East Park County, Wyoming. Journal of Soil and
Water Conservation, 58(2), 105e112.
Hosmer, D. W., Jr., & Lemeshow, S. (2000). Applied logistic regression. Hoboken, NJ,
USA: Wiley.
Huang, J., Pontius, R. G., Jr., Li, Q., & Zhang, Y. (2012). Use of intensity analysis to link
patterns with processes of land change from 1986 to 2007 in a coastal watershed of southeast China. Applied Geography, 34(0), 371e384.
Huddleston, J. H., Pease, J. R., Forrest, W. G., Hickerson, H. J., & Langridge, R. W.
(1987). Use of agricultural land evaluation and site assessment in Linn County,
Oregon, USA. Environmental Management, 11(3), 389e405.
Ihlanfeldt, K. R. (2009). Does comprehensive land-use planning improve cities?
Land Economics, 85(1), 74e86.
Irwin, E. G., & Bockstael, N. E. (2002). Interacting agents, spatial externalities and
the evolution of residential land use patterns. Journal of Economic Geography,
2(1), 31e54.
Kelly, P. F. (1998). The politics of urbanerural relations: land use conversion in the
Philippines. Environment and Urbanization, 10(1), 35e54.
Kline, J. D. (2005). Forest and farmland conservation effects of Oregon’s (USA) landuse planning program. Environmental Management, 35(4), 368e380.
Kline, J. D., & Alig, R. J. (1999). Does land use planning slow the conversion of forest
and farm lands? Growth and Change, 30(1), 3e22.
436 T. Zhong et al. / Applied Geography 35 (2012) 422e438
Kumar, R., & Indrayan, A. (2011). Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve for
medical researchers. Indian Pediatrics, 48(4), 277e287.
Kurucu, Y., & Chiristina, N. K. (2008). Monitoring the impacts of urbanization
and industrialization on the agricultural land and environment of the Torbali, Izmir region, Turkey. Environmental Monitoring and Assessment, 136,
289e297.
Lakes, T., Muller, D., & Kruger, C. (2009). Cropland change in southern Romania:
a comparison of logistic regressions and artificial neural networks. Landscape
Ecology, 24(9), 1195e1206.
Leishman, C., & Bramley, G. (2005). A local housing market model with spatial
interaction and land-use planning controls. Environment and Planning A, 37(9),
1637e1649.
Levia, D. F. (1998). Farmland conversion and residential development in north
central Massachusetts. Land Degradation & Development, 9(2), 123e130.
Lichtenberg, E., & Ding, C. (2009). Local officials as land developers: urban spatial
expansion in China. Journal of Urban Economics, 66(1), 57e64.
Lichtenberg, E., & Ding, C. G. (2008). Assessing farmland protection policy in China.
Land Use Policy, 25(1), 59e68.
Lichtenberg, E., Tra, C., & Hardie, I. (2007). Land use regulation and the provision of
open space in suburban residential subdivisions. Journal of Environmental
Economics and Management, 54(2), 199e213.
Liu, Y. S., Wang, L. J., & Long, H. L. (2008). Spatio-temporal analysis of land-use
conversion in the eastern coastal China during 1996e2005. Journal of
Geographical Sciences, 18(3), 274e282.
Long, H. L., Li, Y. R., Liu, Y. S., Woods, M., & Zou, J. (2012). Accelerated restructuring in
rural China fueled by ‘increasing vs. decreasing balance’ land-use policy for
dealing with hollowed villages. Land Use Policy, 29(1), 11e22.
Long, H. L., Tang, G. P., Li, X. B., & Heilig, G. K. (2007). Socio-economic driving forces
of land-use change in Kunshan, the Yangtze River Delta economic area of China.
Journal of Environmental Management, 83(3), 351e364.
Long, H. L., Zou, J., Pykett, J., & Li, Y. R. (2011). Analysis of rural transformation
development in China since the turn of the new millennium. Applied Geography,
31(3), 1094e1105.
Lubowski, R. N., Plantinga, A. J., & Stavins, R. N. (2008). What drives land-use change
in the United States? A national analysis of landowner decisions. Land
Economics, 84(4), 529e550.
McConnell, V., & Walls, M. (2009). US experience with transferable development
rights. Review of Environmental Economics and Policy, 3(2), 288e303.
Miller, M. D. (2012). The impacts of Atlanta’s urban sprawl on forest cover and
fragmentation. Applied Geography, 34, 171e179.
Millington, J. D. A., Perry, G. L. W., & Romero-Calcerrada, R. (2007). Regression
techniques for examining land use/cover change: a case study of a mediterranean landscape. Ecosystems, 10, 562e578.
Mori, H. (1998). Land conversion at the urban fringe: a comparative study of Japan,
Britain and the Netherlands. Urban Studies, 35(9), 1541e1558.
Mottet, A., Ladet, S., Coque, N., & Gibon, A. (2006). Agricultural land-use change and
its drivers in mountain landscapes: a case study in the Pyrenees. Agriculture
Ecosystems & Environment, 114(2e4), 296e310.
Munroe, D. K., Croissant, C., & York, A. M. (2005). Land use policy and landscape
fragmentation in an urbanizing region: assessing the impact of zoning. Applied
Geography, 25(2), 121e141.
Nellis, L., & Maca, M. N. (1986). The effectiveness of zoning for agricultural lands
protection e a case-study from Cache County, Utah. Landscape and Urban
Planning, 13(1), 45e54.
Nelson, A. C. (1988). An empirical note on how regional urban containment policy
influences an interaction between greenbelt and exurban land markets. Journal
of the American Planning Association, 54(2), 178e184.
Nelson, A. C. (1999). Comparing states with and without growth management e
analysis based on indicators with policy implications. Land Use Policy, 16(2),
121e127.
Nizeyimana, E. L., Petersen, G. W., Imhoff, M. L., Sinclair, H. R., Waltman, S. W., ReedMargetan, D. S., et al. (2001). Assessing the impact of land conversion to urban
use on soils with different productivity levels in the USA. Soil Science Society of
America Journal, 65(2), 391e402.
Patarasuk, R., & Binford, M. W. (2012). Longitudinal analysis of the road network
development and land-cover change in Lop Buri province, Thailand, 1989e2006.
Applied Geography, 32(2), 228e239.
Pease, J. R., & Jackson, P. L. (1979). Farmland preservation in Oregon. Journal of Soil
and Water Conservation, 34(6), 256e259.
Plaut, T. R. (1980). Urban expansion and the loss of farmland in the United States e
implications for the future. American Journal of Agricultural Economics, 62(3),
537e542.
Polyakov, M., & Zhang, D. (2008). Property tax policy and land-use change. Land
Economics, 84(3), 396e408.
Saizen, I., Mizuno, K., & Kobayashi, S. (2006). Effects of land-use master plans in the
metropolitan fringe of Japan. Landscape and Urban Planning, 78(4), 411e421.
Serneels, S., & Lambin, E. F. (2001). Proximate causes of land-use change in Narok
District, Kenya: a spatial statistical model. Agriculture Ecosystems & Environment, 85(1e3), 65e81.
Seto, K. C., & Kaufmann, R. K. (2003). Modeling the drivers of urban land use change
in the Pearl River Delta, China: integrating remote sensing with socioeconomic
data. Land Economics, 79(1), 106e121.
Seto, K. C., Woodcock, C. E., Song, C., Huang, X., Lu, J., & Kaufmann, R. K. (2002).
Monitoring land-use change in the Pearl River Delta using Landsat TM. International Journal of Remote Sensing, 23(10), 1985e2004.
Shrestha, M. K., York, A. M., Boone, C. G., & Zhang, S. (2012). Land fragmentation due
to rapid urbanization in the Phoenix metropolitan area: analyzing the spatiotemporal patterns and drivers. Applied Geography, 32(2), 522e531.
Skinner, M. W., Kuhn, R. G., & Joseph, A. E. (2001). Agricultural land protection in
China: a case study of local governance in Zhejiang province. Land Use Policy,
18(4), 329e340.
Smith, M. D., & Giraud, D. (2006). Traditional land-use planning regulation and
agricultural land conservation: a case study from the USA. Planning Practice &
Research, 21(4), 407e421.
Sophia, R.-H., & Anders, S. (2008). Multilevel and longitudinal modeling using Stata
(2nd ed.). StataCorp LP.
Stamm, T., Gill, R., & Page, K. (1987). Agricultural land evaluation and site assessment in Latah County, Idaho, USA. Environmental Management, 11(3), 379e388.
Steiner, F. (1987). Agricultural land evaluation and site assessment in the United
States e an introduction. Environmental Management, 11(3), 375e377.
Steiner, F., Dunford, R., & Dosdall, N. (1987). The use of the agricultural land evaluation and site assessment system in the United States. Landscape and Urban
Planning, 14(3), 183e199.
Steiner, F. R. (1994). The evolution of land evaluation and site assessment e introduction. In Decade with LESA: The evolution of land evaluation and site assessment
(pp. 11e19).
Su, S., Jiang, Z., Zhang, Q., & Zhang, Y. (2011). Transformation of agricultural landscapes under rapid urbanization: a threat to sustainability in Hang-Jia-Hu
region, China. Applied Geography, 31(2), 439e449.
Su, S., Xiao, R., & Zhang, Y. (2012). Multi-scale analysis of spatially varying relationships between agricultural landscape patterns and urbanization using
geographically weighted regression. Applied Geography, 32(2), 360e375.
Tasser, E., Walde, J., Tappeiner, U., Teutsch, A., & Noggler, W. (2007). Land-use
changes and natural reforestation in the Eastern Central Alps. Agriculture
Ecosystems & Environment, 118(1e4), 115e129.
Tavares, A. O., Pato, R. L., & Magalhães, M. C. (2012). Spatial and temporal land use
change and occupation over the last half century in a peri-urban area. Applied
Geography, 34(0), 432e444.
Thapa, R. B., & Murayama, Y. (2010). Drivers of urban growth in the Kathmandu
valley, Nepal: examining the efficacy of the analytic hierarchy process. Applied
Geography, 30(1), 70e83.
Thorsnes, P. (2000). Internalizing neighborhood externalities: the effect of subdivision size and zoning on residential lot prices. Journal of Urban Economics,
48(3), 397e418.
Thorson, J. A. (1997). The effect of zoning on housing construction. Journal of
Housing Economics, 6(1), 81e91.
Tong, C. L., Hall, C. A. S., & Wang, H. Q. (2003). Land use change in rice, wheat and
maize production in China (1961e1998). Agriculture Ecosystems & Environment,
95(2-3), 523e536.
Tse, R. Y. C. (2001). Impact of comprehensive development zoning on real estate
development in Hong Kong. Land Use Policy, 18(4), 321e328.
Tyler, M., Hunter, L., & Steiner, F. (1987). Use of agricultural land evaluation and site
assessment in Whitman County, Washington, USA. Environmental Management,
11(3), 407e412.
Van Doorn, A. M., & Bakker, M. M. (2007). The destination of arable land in
a marginal agricultural landscape in South Portugal: an exploration of land use
change determinants. Landscape Ecology, 22(7), 1073e1087.
Vance, C., & Geoghegan, J. (2002). Temporal and spatial modelling of tropical
deforestation: a survival analysis linking satellite and household survey data.
Agricultural Economics, 27(3), 317e332.
Veldkamp, A., Verburg, P. H., Kok, K., de Koning, G. H. J., Priess, J., & Bergsma, A. R.
(2001). The need for scale sensitive approaches in spatially explicit land use
change modeling. Environmental Modeling & Assessment, 6(2), 111e121.
Verburg, P. H., Chen, Y. Q., & Veldkamp, T. A. (2000). Spatial explorations of land use
change and grain production in China. Agriculture Ecosystems & Environment,
82(1e3), 333e354.
Verburg, P. H., Overmars, K. P., Huigen, M. G. A., de Groot, W. T., & Veldkamp, A.
(2006). Analysis of the effects of land use change on protected areas in the
Philippines. Applied Geography, 26(2), 153e173.
Verburg, P. H., Veldkamp, A., & Fresco, L. O. (1999). Simulation of changes in the
spatial pattern of land use in China. Applied Geography, 19(3), 211e233.
Vermeulen, W., & van Ommeren, J. (2009). Does land use planning shape regional
economies? A simultaneous analysis of housing supply, internal migration and
local employment growth in the Netherlands. Journal of Housing Economics,
18(4), 294e310.
Wang, Y. M., & Scott, S. (2008). Illegal farmland conversion in China’s urban periphery:
local regime and national transitions. Urban Geography, 29(4), 327e347.
Ward, R. M. (1991). The US farmland protection policy act: another case of benign
neglect. Land Use Policy, 8(1), 63e68.
Weng, Q. H. (2002). Land use change analysis in the Zhujiang Delta of China using
satellite remote sensing, GIS and stochastic modelling. Journal of Environmental
Management, 64(3), 273e284.
Williams, T. H. L. (1985). Implementing LESA on a geographic information-system e
a case-study. Photogrammetric Engineering and Remote Sensing, 51(12),1923e1932.
Wooldridge, J. M. (2005). Introductory econometrics: A modern approach (3rd ed.).
Mason, OH: Thomson/South-Western.
Wright, L. E., Zitzmann, W., Young, K., & Googins, R. (1983). LESA e agricultural land
evaluation and site assessment.Journal of Soil andWater Conservation, 38(2), 82e86.
Wu, F. L. (2009). Land development, inequality and urban villages in China. International Journal of Urban and Regional Research, 33(4), 885e889.
T. Zhong et al. / Applied Geography 35 (2012) 422e438 437
Wu, J., & Cho, S. H. (2007). The effect of local land use regulations on urban
development in the Western United States. Regional Science and Urban
Economics, 37(1), 69e86.
Wu, K.-y., & Zhang, H. (2012). Land use dynamics, built-up land expansion patterns,
and driving forces analysis of the fast-growing Hangzhou metropolitan area,
eastern China (1978e2008). Applied Geography, 34(0), 137e145.
Xiao, J. Y., Shen, Y. J., Ge, J. F., Tateishi, R., Tang, C. Y., Liang, Y. Q., et al. (2006).
Evaluating urban expansion and land use change in Shijiazhuang, China, by
using GIS and remote sensing. Landscape and Urban Planning, 75(1-2), 69e80.
Xie, Y. C., Yu, M., Bai, Y. F., & Xing, X. R. (2006). Ecological analysis of an emerging
urban landscape pattern-desakota: a case study in Suzhou, China. Landscape
Ecology, 21(8), 1297e1309.
Xu, W. (2004). The changing dynamics of land-use change in rural China: a case
study of Yuhang, Zhejiang province. Environment and Planning A, 36(9), 1595e
1615.
Yeh, A. G. O., & Li, X. (1999). Economic development and agricultural land loss in the
Pearl River Delta, China. Habitat International, 23(3), 373e390.
York, A. M., & Munroe, D. K. (2010). Urban encroachment, forest regrowth and landuse institutions: does zoning matter? Land Use Policy, 27(2), 471e479.
Yu, W., Zang, S., Wu, C., Liu, W., & Na, X. (2011). Analyzing and modeling land use
land cover change (LUCC) in the Daqing City, China. Applied Geography, 31(2),
600e608.
Zhang, T. W. (2000). Land market forces and government’s role in sprawl e the case
of China. Cities, 17(2), 123e135.
Zhong, T. Y., Huang, X. J., Zhang, X. Y., & Wang, K. (2011). Temporal and spatial
variability of agricultural land loss in relation to policy and accessibility in a low
hilly region of southeast China. Land Use Policy, 28(4), 762e769.
Zhou, B., & Kockelman, K. M. (2008). Neighborhood impacts on land use change:
a multinomial logit model of spatial relationships. Annals of Regional Science,
42(2), 321e340.
438 T. Zhong et al. / Applied Geography 35 (2012) 422e438
1
一、循环经济发展的基本特征
 1、生态环境的弱胁迫性；
 2、资源利用的高效率性；
 3、行业行为的高标准性；
 4、产业发展的强持续性；
 5、经济发展的强带动性；
 6、产业增长的强集聚性。 
第三节 循环经济型资源利用
2
二、资源节约与循环经济
 
 循环经济的行为原则 
减量化(Reducing）
再使用(Reusing)
再循环(Recycling） 
第三节 循环经济型资源利用
3
二、资源节约与循环经济
 
 4R＝3R＋再制造原则（REPRODUCING）（徐匡迪） 
 4R＝3R＋再思考原则（RETHINKGING）（季昆森） 
 4R＝3R＋再组织原则（REORGANIZING）（崔铁
宁等） 
 4R＝3R＋再回收原则（RECOVERING）（崔和瑞） 
 6R ＝ 3R ＋可再生 （ RENEWABLE ） ＋可替代
(REPLACE)＋恢复与重建(RECOVERY)（李赶顺） 
 新3R = 算帐(RECKONING) + 调整(READJUSTING) 
+重构（RECONSTRUCTING）(丁同玉) 
第三节 循环经济型资源利用
4
 循环经济与线型经济模式的比较
第三节 循环经济型资源利用
经济增
长方式 特征 物质流动 理论
指导
循环经
济
对资源的低开采、
高利用、污染物
的低排放
“资源—产品—
再生资源”的物
质反复循环流动
生态学
规律
线型经
济
对资源的高开采、
低利用、污染物
的高排放
“资源—产品—
污染物”的单向
流动
机械论
规律
企业层面上的小循环 
 如炼钢行业(陆钟武院士，2003)：
 烧结—炼铁—炼钢—初轧—轧钢
O A B C D
路径：减少资源投入；提高资源利用效率；减
少污染排放 
第三节 循环经济型资源利用 
循环经济层次:三个层次VS四个层次 
 
微循环:家庭 
小循环:企业 
中循环:园区 
大循环:社会 
第三节 循环经济型资源利用 
例证：企业层面上 
 
美国杜邦化学公司模式:
 放弃使用某些环境有害型的化学物质
 减少某些化学物质的使用量
 发明回收本公司产品的新工艺
第三节 循环经济型资源利用 
区域层面上的中循环 
 下游部门的废物，重返上游部门，成为资源，
或部门之间共生。
A
B C
路径：企业间废弃物资源化，实现污染减排、资源循环
利用及资源投入减量化 
第三节 循环经济型资源利用 
北九州生态工业园内企业间链接图
汽车 
办公 
设备 
萤光灯 
家电 
医疗 
器具 
塑料 
饮料瓶 
ＥＬＶ 废纸 
PCB处理 
设施 
食用油 
食品垃圾 
复合核心设施 
(熔融炉) 
综合环境 
联合企业 
响滩循环利用团地 
实证研究地区 
空罐 
建筑 
废物 
游戏机 
墨盒 
二期计划 
地区 
废木材 
废塑料 
压缩打包 
木枠 
IC主板 
废塑料 
(ＰＰ) 
甲醇 
木屑 空罐 
萤光灯 
废
板
材 
电脑CRT 
IC主板 
木片 
废部件 
(ＰＰ) 
废油・ 
废塑料 
电器零件 
发动机 
电器零件 
氟利昂 
已建立的链接 
处于实验阶段的链接 
今后有待开发的链接 
电力 
残渣 
萤光灯 
燃料 
燃料 
木
板 
再生 
柴油 
木板、PS 
萤光灯 
墨盒 
泡沫 
聚苯乙烯 
园区内企业 
废塑料(汽车、 
墨盒、游戏机) 
园区内企业 
重型机械的燃料 
(ELV、办公设备、 
有机溶剂) 
园区内企业 
瓦楞纸箱、纸类 
(墨盒、建筑废物、萤光灯、空罐等) 
园区内企业 
墨盒 
电器零件 
园区内企业 
事务所的萤光灯 
氟利昂 
废油・ 
废塑料 
萤光灯 
再利用 
电脑 造纸 
洞海湾地区 
电脑 
泡沫 
聚苯乙烯 
筱原-日本 
社会层面上的大循环 
三大类（产成品或消费品）：
 技术上可行，经济上合理：金属、玻璃、
纸张、催化剂、水及塑料
 技术上可行，经济上未必合理：建筑材料
、包装材料、溶剂
 无法进入大循环：表面涂层、油漆、杀虫
剂、燃料、洗涤剂等
第三节 循环经济型资源利用 
亚洲的城市垃圾(MSW)排放单位
1990 20011999 2000 1995
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
0 1 0 2 0 3 0 4 0 5 0 6 0
GDP per capita (1000US$)
MSW generation per capita
 (kg/capita-day)
Asian countries
OECD countries
Japan
y=0.702x^0.2349
r2=0.59
China
Philippines
Indonesia
India
Malaysia
Korea
Taiwan
Hong Kong
Turkey
Thailand
Japan
寺园-日本
第三节 循环经济型资源利用 
12
三、循环经济型资源利用模式
工业生态整合模式：企业簇群式模式的反思
清洁生产模式：基于未来发展成本的选择
产业间多级生态链联接模式
生态农业园模式
家庭型循环经济模式
以可再生资源利用为核心的区域循环经济模式
商业化回收处理模式 
第三节 循环经济型资源利用
13
第三节 循环经济型资源利用
14
第三节：循环经济型资源利用
污
染
治
理
成
本
末端治理方式
清洁生产方式
企业规模
末端治理方式与清洁生产方式污染治理成本的比较
15
产业间多级生态链
联接模式 传统的废弃物处理方式
 排放到大海，危害珊瑚礁
施入田间。由于肥性太强，而损伤作物。
由于排放物太多，而难以处理。
沼气排放而失去经济价值。
清除。
啤酒厂 啤酒糟原料
蘑菇栽培
啤酒糟原料
养 鸡
肥料渣
肥料渣
鸡粪
分解鸡粪
生产沼气 沼气
沼气
能源
固体物
养鱼
水面栽培
淤泥 淤泥
斐济产业间多级生态链联接模式
 （3）产业间多级生态链联接模式
16
牧草种植 奶牛养殖
喷灌系统
牛屎
牛粪
化粪池
发酵
蚯蚓
养殖
黄鳝
养鸡
制药
废渣
 生态农业园模式
江苏常州以奶牛养殖为核心的生态农业模式
第三节：循环经济型资源利用
17
第三节：循环经济型资源利用
农村家庭 有机废弃物 沼气 能源
气渣
农产品 种植、养殖
副产品
农村家庭型循环经济模式
18
谢 谢 !
1
本章要求：
 要求学生理解资源经营的内涵和特征，
特别是要掌握资源资产的概念、特征以及
相应的资源经营模式。在此基础上，针对
一些主要资源的保护和管理问题，学会从
资源经营的角度加以思考和分析。
第八章：资源经营
2
 长期以来，除了自然资源产业作为经营对象外，自然
资源在更多的方面则是保护的对象，如耕地保护、水资源
保护、森林保护、湿地保护。
 然而纯粹的自然资源保护，不仅占用了政府或社会大
量的资金，而且一定意义上也未必能体现到积极的效果。
 在市场经济体制下，自然资源不是单纯需要保护的对
象，也可以按照市场经济的原则经营并获取收益，从而实
现从保护依赖向经营增值的转变，以及生态效益与经济效
益的统一。
缘起
3
一、资源经营的内涵
 1、资源保护的新理念
 如果在保护和开拓野生动物栖息地的同时，通过
赋予资源或土地所有者一定的生态经营权，即允许其
为与之有关的狩猎者、垂钓者、赏鸟者及其他野生动
物爱好者提供消费的场所，可以使资源或土地所有者
有所收益，同时也保护了野生动物，而这种行为便是
资源经营。
第一节：资源经营的内涵与特征
4
 2、概念定义
 资源经营即是指通过商业
手段来保护自然资源和公共空
间，保护野生生物的生活环境，
拯救濒临灭绝的物种，提高环
境质量；同时还进行自然资源
产品创新，吸引风险投资，与
资源所有者签定合同，推广环
保产品，从而不断满足人们增
长的对休闲和生态产品的需要。
第一节：资源经营的内涵与特征
5
二、资源经营的特征
 1、资源经营理念的创新性
 按照传统的资源环境保护
理念，是难以乃至无法开展生
态经营的，因此，资源经营理
念是一个创新性的观点和创新
性的成果。没有经营理念的创
新，也就没有资源经营的产生。
南京将军山
第一节：资源经营的内涵与特征
6
 美国国际纸业公司有一个占地50万公顷，横跨得克萨
斯州、路易斯安那州和阿肯色州的木材生产基地，为了愉
悦附近居民、安抚环境学家以及减少政府的过多干涉，以
确保木材生产的顺利进行，该公司在这一基地养殖了一定
数量的野生动物。
 由于偷猎和过量打猎，加之休闲族对于土地的滥用，
使得公司用于维护这一木材基地的费用居高不下，而且美
国东南部一棵树从种子到成材需要30年，这30年内公司要
花费大量的投资及保育费用，但却没有任何收益。
案例
第一节：资源经营的内涵与特征
7
 为此，该公司于1983年开始实施一项野生动物和休闲
经营项目，其主要经营内容包括向狩猎俱乐部出租土地、
经营日常土地使用许可以及季节性家庭使用土地许可。
1986年这一经营收入达到200万美元，1990年达1000万美
元，在经营收入不断增长的同时，由于野生动物生存条件
的改善以及有限制区域的狩猎制度，使得野生动物数量持
续上升。
第一节：资源经营的内涵与特征
8
 2、资源经营产品的创造性
 资源经营产品的开发过程也是一个生态产品需求
的创造过程。
第一节：资源经营的内涵与特征
9
 在美国爱达荷州实施“河流经营计划”的一河流经营
开发公司，通过1984-1989年项目的实施，使一条河流成为
州内第一条鲑鱼可以产卵的都市河流，并将其与房地产开
发项目结合起来，使其经营的房地产附有优美的环境，如
有鲑鱼生存的河流、繁茂的河边青草以及遍布的小湖并为
野生动物提供了良好的环境。这一项目成为爱达荷州渔牧
管理部门修复都市河流的样板工程，并被城市土地组织授
予杰出设计奖。
案例
第一节：资源经营的内涵与特征
10
3、资源经营效益的持续性
 由于生态资本不断增值
以及人们对于生态资本需求
的不断增加，会使得生态经
营效益也持续增长。
第一节：资源经营的内涵与特征
11
 从1978年开始，加拿大魁北克省开始通过建立资源
开发区实施资源保护。1978年建立的第一个资源开发区，
由地方社区管理，主要提供狩猎和捕鱼等服务，之后又分
别建立了大西洋鲑鱼资源开发区和水鸟资源开发区。每个
开发区都由一个非赢利性公司专门管理，这一公司与政府
签定合约，通过对使用者收费发展休闲业，并帮助监控鱼
类和其他野生动物的数量和种类。
案例
第一节：资源经营的内涵与特征
12
 在政府一开始投入前期运行费
用之后，到1995年每一个资源开发
区都能依靠自己的收入来运行。随
着经营收入的不断增加，资源开发
区不断改善野生动物的生存条件，
从而使得野生动物数量不但没有因
为资源开发而减少，反而增加。
第一节：资源经营的内涵与特征
1
本章要求：
 既要求学生理解资源安全的内涵和特
征，还要求其对资源安全问题所涉及到的
具体方面，如资源储备、资源贸易和生态
安全等有一深入了解。包括如何联系实际
做好资源储备工作、如何发展资源贸易、
以及如何制定适宜的生态安全战略等。
第九章：资源安全
2
一、资源安全的概念
 资源安全是资源短缺时代的产物，人口膨胀、
环境污染、资源短缺是伴随人类社会进程的三大
制约因素。
 资源安全这一术语出现于20世纪90年代中后
期，是在人类社会快速发展对资源承载能力产生
巨大压力的前景下提出来的。
第一节：资源安全的概念及特征
3
 1、概念定义
 资源安全是指一个国家或地区可以持续、稳定、
及时、足量和经济地获取所需自然资源的状态和能力，
是资源对经济发展和人民生活的保障程度。
 资源获取能力越强，保障程度越高，就越安全。
 资源安全并不是一个简单的概念，具有丰富的内
涵和复合的范畴。
第一节：资源安全的概念及特征
4
 2、资源安全的五层基本含义
 ① 数量内涵，即要有一定的资
源量，包括总量和人均占有量。从国
家安定与经济社会发展的意义而言，
后者更具现实意义。
 ② 质量内涵，即资源要有一定
的质量或品质，由此产生了最低质量
的概念，如最低生活用水质量。
第一节：资源安全的概念及特征
5
 ③ 结构内涵，即资源品种结构的合理性与供给渠
道的多样性，资源品种结构的合理分布可以保证在经济
合理条件下获得资源利用的优化生态环境效益，供给渠
道的多样性是供给稳定性的基础。
 ④ 均衡内涵，包括区域均衡与人群均衡两方面。
资源分布的不均衡性，以及资源的非遍布同质性，增加
了资源供给的时间和成本，是导致资源安全问题的原因
之一；人群阶层的存在，导致获取资源的经济能力（支
付能力）差异，也是影响资源安全的重要因素之一。
第一节：资源安全的概念及特征
6
 ⑤ 经济或价格内涵，指一个国家或
地区可以从市场（特别是国际市场）上
以较小经济代价（如较低价格）获取所
需资源的能力或状态。
 在常态（非战争状态）下，一般国
家都可以从市场上获取其所需的资源，
只是其所付出的经济代价不同而已。
第一节：资源安全的概念及特征
7
 3、资源安全的经济成因
 ① 资源时空分布不均导致各国资源利用的先天
差异和不确定性；
 ② 一国资源产品生产能力在短期内具有刚性，
导致短期产量大幅上升的困难性；
 ③ 进出口价格波动和数量波动所导致的社会成
本远高于私人成本。
第一节：资源安全的概念及特征
8
二、资源安全的特征
 1、主体性
 资源安全是针对某一资源利用主体而言的，其主
体可以是一个家庭，一个企业，一个省市（区域）或
一个国家，具有利已的、为我所有、为我所用的含义。
从世界经济一体化、地球资源市场化的角度而言，依
据“两种资源、两种市场”的原则，我们应本着中国
的资源数量、品种、品质、结构、特征，立足世界资
源供需关系，解决中国资源安全问题。
第一节：资源安全的概念及特征
9
 2、动态性
 世界经济发展的波动性，政治格局的变化，严重
自然灾害的发生，以及政治事件、局部战争等，将严
重影响资源供需状况与结构，冲击资源供需动态平衡，
从而影响国家资源安全的动态性。与资源稀缺一样，
在当今人口、资源、环境与发展这一复杂系统中，资
源安全是一个永恒主题，任何国家或地区在资源安全
领域都可能出现或面临新的问题。
第一节：资源安全的概念及特征
10
 3、层次性
 资源安全之程度和主体，决
定了其层次性特点。从程度来看，
有战略性、重要性、一般性、预
备性之分；从主体来看，有国家
资源安全、区域（地区）资源安
全、群体资源安全、个体资源安
全等之别。
第一节：资源安全的概念及特征
11
 4、相关性
 资源安全本身是现代经济社会的产物，是人口、
资源、环境与发展这一复杂系统的反映。根据系统论
原理，系统与系统间，系统内部各子系统间都存在一
定的相关性。资源安全亦不例外，它与生态安全、环
境安全、食物安全及经济安全间存在较明显的正相关
性，与经济社会发展程度亦存在明显的相关性，而不
同资源间由于相互替代性亦存在一定的相关性。
第一节：资源安全的概念及特征
12
 5、干预性
 是指一国或区域政府对于危及资源安全的事态或
趋势，在市场难以调节的情况下主动利用政策法规干
预供求，使其回复到相对平衡状况，保证国民经济社
会的稳定发展。
 以土地资源为例，随着我国大量农用土地被征用
并转化为城市建设用地，国家粮食安全受到威胁。为
此，国家自2003年8月以来采取了一系列宏观调控政
策，干预和规范土地市场，以保护耕地资源。
第一节：资源安全的概念及特征
13
三、资源安全与地缘政治
 国外对资源安全非常重视，许多国家都把资源安
全战略作为国家安全战略的重要组成部分。
 冷战结束后，在新的世界政治经济格局时代，资
源的战略地位并未因科学技术进步和经济发展而有丝
毫的降低；相反，随着人口、资源、环境、发展
（PRED）间关系的复杂化，其在世界经济发展中的战
略地位更加突出。
第一节：资源安全的概念及特征
14
 以石油为例，美国国家安全委
员会1997年5月发表的《面向新世
纪的国家安全战略》认为，为确保
美国在21世纪的繁荣、安全和在世
界上的领导地位，必须确保蕴藏丰
富石油的中东地区的和平、稳定和
“朝着民主制度过渡”
，必要时不
惜以武力恢复并保持该地区稳定和
力量的平衡。
第一节：资源安全的概念及特征
2014年/第9期
一、城市绿色发展承载水平
人均公园绿地面积（市区）。“公
园绿地”是城市中向公众开放的、以
游憩为主要功能，同时兼有健全生
态、美化景观、防灾减灾等综合作用
的绿化用地。从各市情况看，扬州
市人均公园绿地面积位居全省第
一，人均公园绿地面积为18.70平方
米，泰州市人均公园绿地面积排名
最后，为9.00平方米，不足扬州的一
半，各市人均公园绿地面积差异显
著。
建成区绿化覆盖率。建成区绿
化覆盖率反映了城市的绿化水平，
是城市绿色发展的重要载体。江苏
省各市建成区绿化覆盖率都在42%
左右，其中南京市的建成区绿化覆
盖率最高，达到 46.5%。只有盐城
市与淮安市绿化覆盖率不足40%，
分别为39.5%与39.1%。
林木覆盖率。目前阶段，江苏
省各市的林木覆盖率大部分在20%
以上，其中，徐州的覆盖率情况最
好，达到31%。但是，南通、泰州、苏
州三市的覆盖率仅有17%左右，其
中 苏 州 的 覆 盖 率 情 况 最 差 ，为
17.01%。
空气质量二级以上天数比例。
空气质量的好坏直接反映空气污染
程度。从各市的空气质量比较情况
来看，扬州、无锡、徐州、常州、宿迁、
镇江、南通、苏州空气质量二级以上
的天数均在九成以上，扬州最高。
而南京、盐城在工业污染、烟尘污染
与机动车污染等多重原因下，空气
质量状况不容乐观。
非建设用地比例（市区）。非建
设用地主要划分为“水域”、“农林用
地”和“其他非建设用地”三类。江
苏各市市区非建设用地所占比例均
在85%以上，但各市之间差异较大，
宿迁的非建设用地比例最高，达到
96.7%，连云港非建设用地所占比
例最低，仅为85.9%。
人口密度。目前各市的人口密
度在全国范围内均处于较高位置，
其中，无锡市的人口密度已达到
1008人/平方公里，为全省人口密度
最高的城市，盐城市的人口密度为
480 人/平方公里，其人口密度相对
最小。人口密度过大，对江苏的经
济社会发展有着不小的阻力。因
此，如何协调好人口与经济社会发
展的问题至关重要。
城市燃气普及率。城市燃气是
城市重要基础设施，发展城市燃气
事业有利于节约能源、保护环境、方
便群众生活。我省总体的燃气普及
率均在90%以上，在全国处于较高
水平，也侧面反映社会经济的迅速
发展。各市中，除了扬州市和宿迁
市，其他市的城市燃气普及率都超
过96%，其中，南通与苏州的城市燃
气普及率达到100%。
重要生态功能保护区数量。重
要生态功能保护区包括地质遗迹保
护区、生物多样性保护区、自然与人
文景观保护区、水源水质保护区、湿
地生态系统维护区等几类。各市均
有不少重要生态功能保护区，南京
市、苏州市和扬州市的生态功能保
护区较多，分别为 78、71、71，盐城
市、宿迁市和常州市保护区个数较
少，为29、26、25。
城市污水处理率（市区）。全省
各市的城市污水处理率均在80%以
江苏省城市绿色发展评价报告
江苏省绿色发展研究基地
评 估
特别关注 tebieguanzhu
24
http：//www.qunzh.com
上，其中，无锡市的情况最好，处理
率高达93.1%，苏州市紧随其后，处
理率达到 90.2%；盐城市与连云港
市的污水处理率仅在80%左右。
二、城市绿色发展能力水平
城镇生活污水处理率。江苏各
市 城 镇 生 活 污 水 处 理 率 大 都 在
60%-70%。无锡市、南通市的城镇
生活污水处理率较高，达到 84.1%
与83.0%，而泰州市、盐城市的污水
处理率则相对较低。总体来看，城
镇生活污水处理水平还不高，各市
需采取积极有效措施进一步处理生
活污水。
生活垃圾无害化处理率。从各
市的情况看，镇江市、常州市、无锡
市、南通市、苏州市、泰州市、连云港
市生活垃圾无害化处理率均已达到
100%，而苏北有3个市的处理率还
不到50%，垃圾污染情况还较为严
重，为重点整治区域。
工业废水排放达标率。目前，
全省工业废水排放达标率95%，基
本满足排放的要求。从各市情况
看，盐城市和宿迁市的工业废水治
理情况均未达标。常州市、淮安市、
南通市的工业废水治理颇有成效，
治理率达到了100%，做到了工业废
水零排放。
工业二氧化硫处理率。各市之
间二氧化硫处理情况差异较明显，
南京市、镇江市、徐州市二氧化硫处
理率较高，在75%左右，南通市、扬
州市、无锡市等处于中等水平，处理
率在 40-60%之间，苏南有一个市
的二氧化硫处理率为 13 个市中最
低的，仅有25%。
工业烟尘处理率。工业烟尘处
理率总体情况良好，除泰州市工业
烟尘处理率只有80%外，其他市均
在 90%以上，并且大部分城市接近
100%。
工业废水重复利用率。各市工
业废水重复利用率差异较大，徐州
市、连云港市、苏州市、镇江市废水
的重复利用率达到90%，属于循环
利用效率较高城市，而苏北有三个
市由于有较多污染大的重工业企
业，其工业废水的重复利用率不足
70%。总体而言，江苏省工业废水
重复利用仍有较大上升空间，应积
极改进相关工业废水循环利用设
施，以提高其利用率。
工业固体废物综合利用率。工
业固体废物利用率总体状况良好，
大约在 93%左右。从各市情况分
析，除南京市综合利用率为88.8%，
其他各市的工业固体废物综合利用
率均在90%以上。宿迁市与徐州市
的工业固体废物综合利用率达到
100%，做到完全重复利用。
三、城市绿色发展效率水平
万元工业增加值能耗。万元工
业增加值能耗是指企业每万元工业
产值所消耗的能源量（吨标准煤）。
我省目前能源消费结构不合理，原
煤消费量比重偏高，工业增长速度
加快，能源的需求量大，能耗也偏
大。从各市情况来看，各市的能耗
水平在0.6-1.6吨标准煤/万元。
单位GDP建设用地减少率。江
苏人地矛盾十分尖锐突出，要用有
限的土地保障经济社会可持续发
展，就必须大力推进节约集约利用
土地。各市单位 GDP 建设用地减
少率的情况差异非常大，13个城市
中，有 7 个城市的单位 GDP 建设用
地是增加的。徐州市、无锡市和南
京市单位 GDP 建设用地面积基本
持平，常州市单位GDP建设用地减
少率最高。总体而言，各市集约利
用土地方面的工作还有待提高。
单位GDP二氧化硫排放量。为
实现《江苏基本实现现代化指标体
系（试行）》的目标，单位 GDP 二氧
化硫的排放量需在1.2千克/万元以
下。根据目前各市的情况看，一半
的城市达到标准，还有 6 个城市不
符合标准，有的市超标严重，目前排
放量分别为 4.70 千克/万元和 4.87
千克/万元。可见，节能减排的工作
压力仍然较大。
单位工业产值COD排放量。工
业化进程加快，工业废水量必然增
加，COD 的排放量也会相应增加，
从而污染水源，影响水质。比较各
市单位工业产值COD排放量，宿迁
市的 COD 排放量最高，为 23.81 吨/
亿元，镇江的 COD 排放量最低，为
9.04吨/亿元，不到宿迁的一半。总
体而言，各市单位工业产值COD排
放量差异较明显。
单位 GDP 工业固体废物排放
量。单位 GDP 工业固体废物排放
量越低，说明工业所造成的环境污
染越小，相对产生的环境正效应就
越大。从各市情况看，13个城市单
位 GDP 工业固体废物排放量差异
较大。苏北重工业基地的市单位
GDP工业固体废物排放量高达500.6
千克/万元，仍属于粗放经济模式。
盐城市的排放量最小，仅为87.6千
克/万元，不到最高市的1/5。
单位GDP用水量。目前全省存
在局部区域和时段水资源短缺的问
题，水质型缺水问题十分突出，水资
源 利 用 效 率 偏 低。 从 各 市 单 位
GDP用水量比较分析，南京市的单
位GDP用水量最大，是处于第二大
since1937
25
2014年/第9期
江苏地级市城市绿色发展综合评价
用水量的淮安市的两倍。其他市的
单位GDP用水量较为接近，泰州市
和盐城市的用水量最小。
四、城市绿色发展提升水平
第三产业增加值比重。第三产
业增加值比重反映一个国家或地区
所处的经济发展阶段，反映经济发
展的总体水平。从各市情况看，南
京市第三产业增加值比重最大，是
江苏省唯一超过50%的市，而宿迁、
盐城、泰州三个市的第三产业增加
值比重均低于40%，其余各市差异
不大。
高新技术产业比重。高新技术
产业比重是一个国家或地区的经济
发展竞争力的测度指标。各市的高
新技术产业比重差异显著，宿迁市
高新技术产业比重最低，低于10%，
而盐城市的高新技术产业比重最
高，高达70%，除去这两个市，其他
各市的高新技术产业比重差距相对
较小。
三废综合利用产品产值占GDP
比例。三废综合利用产品产值占
GDP 比例是衡量生态环境状况的
重要指标。各市的三废综合利用产
品产值占GDP比例参差不齐，呈台
阶状走势，其中南京市和淮安市的
比例遥遥领先，而盐城市的三废综
合利用产品产值占GDP比例最低，
不足淮安市的1/10。
每万人拥有公交车数量。每万
人拥有公交车数量是反映城市公共
交通发展水平和交通结构状况的指
标。从各市情况来看，无锡市和苏
州市数量最高，每万人平均 13 辆，
盐城市、淮安市、宿迁市、南通市数
量较低，仅3辆左右。总体而言，各
市之间存在一定差距。
环境污染治理指数。环境污染
治理指数是反映科技进步在促进环
境保护方面的作用，用以综合反映
区域治理环境污染的力度和效果，
主要考虑了工业废水、废气和固体
废物的综合治理效果等主要反映环
境治理的指标。各市环境污染治理
指数均在 85 以上，苏州最高，为
95.4，宿迁最低，为85.0。
资源综合利用指数。资源综合
利用，包括利用废弃资源回收的各
种产品，废渣综合利用，废液（水）综
合利用，废气综合利用，废旧物资回
收利用。资源综合利用指数可以用
来综合反映一个地区的经济可持续
发展能力。各市资源综合利用指数
均在70以上，徐州最高，为95.1，宿
迁最低，为72.0。
每十万人专利申请数。专利具
体可分为三种类型：发明专利、外观
设计专利、实用新型专利。其中，发
明专利技术含量高，其申请量和授
权量代表了一个国家或地区的技术
发明能力和水平。我省各市十万人
申请专利数差异较大，苏州居于首
位，达到 737.4
件，宿迁最少，
仅为18.7件。
科技活动
人员占从业人
员比重。科技
活动人员占从
业人员的比重
是反映企业在
科技创新主体
方面的投入和
拥有情况。各市科技活动人员占从
业人口比重都在3.5%以下。其中，
南京科技活动人员比重最大，为
3.21%，宿迁比重最小，为0.17%。
研发投入占 GDP 比例。目前，
专家普遍认同创新型国家或地区的
一个重要标志是，研发经费占GDP
的比重在 2％以上。2013 年，江苏
省全社会研发投入占地区生产总值
达到了2.3％，在全国率先基本达到
创新型国家投入水平。从各市看
来，苏州、常州、无锡、南京的研发投
入比值已超过2%，可列入创新型地
区的行列。
五、城市绿色发展综合评价
对于江苏省城市绿色发展评
价，主要是从城市绿色发展承载水
平、城市绿色发展能力水平、城市绿
色发展效率水平、城市绿色发展提
升水平四个方面来对各个地级市进
行评估分析。综合以上分析，江苏
省 13 个地级市绿色发展水平由高
到低排序为，镇江 288 分，常州 285
分，苏州 276 分，南京 266 分，扬州
255.5 分，淮安 243.5 分，无锡 239
分，连云港220分，南通215分，徐州
192分，宿迁190分，泰州166分，盐
城149分。□
（课题组成员：黄贤金、赖力、钟太
洋、陈志刚、李升峰、高珊、何为、陈雅、
金雨泽、童岩冰）
责任编辑：尤 展
特别关注 tebieguanzhu
26
1
 资源可持续利用是指能长期保持资源再生能力和
令人满意环境质量的资源利用方式。
 可持续利用作为一种哲学理念，它蕴涵了某些能
使人类社会延续与发展的伦理和经济价值。
 从伦理价值来看，它反映了各代人都有权利充分
利用各种已有资源造福社会的代际公平观。
 从经济价值来看，它反映了资源存在本身就有巨
大潜在价值的事实。
第四节：资源可持续利用的产权制度
2
一、资源可持续利用的产权制度特征
 明确和保护资源产权，建立产权变更和转移的交
易规则，是奠定可持续发展的经济体制的基础。
 自然资源产权制度是连结包括自然人、法人、国
家等在内的广大社会关系主体与自然资源这一关系客
体的桥梁和纽带，构成了自然资源法律制度的基础和
核心。
第四节：资源可持续利用的产权制度
3
 不同的产权制度使主客体之间发生着不同的关
系，直接决定着各法律关系主体的积极性和创造性，
直接决定着自然资源的配置效益、开发利用效率和
保护培育程度，是一个影响自然资源可持续利用的
关键问题。
第四节：资源可持续利用的产权制度
4
二、资源可持续利用的产权制度改革
 （1）构建多元化的自然资源所有权体系
 尽快从单一的自然资源所有权过渡到建立多元化
的所有权体系。
 自然资源的所有权应对不同资源实施不同政策，
对同一种资源的不同用途也要实施不同政策，实施的
依据是对象资源性质和用途的公共性和外部性的大小。
根据自然资源产权多样化特征，应分门别类建立起多
样的所有权体系。
第四节：资源可持续利用的产权制度
5
 （2）自然资源的使用权和经营权的市场化
 产权效率是以产权交易为前提的。
 由于产权是排他性权利，产权支配的完整性就必
然要求产权交易的完整性，因而也就决定了产权交易
必须有所有权的交易。
 必须改变自然资源使用权低偿获取（尤其是水资
源、农用地用途转变、海域使用权等）的产权安排制
度，引入市场竞争和有偿获得自然资源使用权的产权
安排制度。
第四节：资源可持续利用的产权制度
6
 近年来，江苏省按照林地所有权和使用权分离的原则，在
保持林地国家所有和集体所有不变的前提下，通过竞标拍卖、
招标承包、租赁承包、反租倒包和股份合作等多种形式，将林
地使用权交给那些能够和善于经营的主体，促进林业资源的优
化配置和林业经营要素的自由流动，建立了投资者、经营者、
管理者多元化和责、权、利相统一的经营机制。
 相关调查结果显示，这项以产权制度为核心的改革，极大
地调动广大群众植树造林的积极性，激发投资者、生产者和管
理者的积极性，从根本上建立起植树管树的新机制和适应市场
经济要求的林业生产投入、管理和分配方式，使长期困扰林业
发展的诸多问题得到解决。
案例
第四节：资源可持续利用的产权制度
7
 （3）自然资源市场组织的建设和市场运行规则的
规范
 在自然资源的产权得到清晰界定以后，为了达成
市场交易，减少市场交易费用，就必须加强自然资源
市场组织的建设和市场运行规则的规范。
 在我国的大量自然资源产权的交易中，由于市场
组织建设的不充分，市场运行规则的不规范，从而加
大了交易费用。因此，只有加强自然资源市场体系的
组织建设，规范市场运行规则，才能在自然资源领域
充分发挥市场机制的基础性配置资源的作用。
第四节：资源可持续利用的产权制度
8
 2003年5月19日，江苏省省长梁保华同时签发第10、11、12
号省政府令，发布了《江苏省国有土地储备办法》、《江苏省
国有土地使用权招标拍卖挂牌出让办法》、《江苏省国有土地
租赁办法》。这是江苏省加强国有土地资产管理，进一步规范
土地市场秩序的一项重要举措。对于从源头上防止腐败的重要
举措，规范国有土地使用权出让行为，优化土地资源配置，形
成公开、公平、公正的土地使用制度，促进各级土地行政主管
部门依法行政，具有重要意义。
案例
第四节：资源可持续利用的产权制度
9
 （4）从法律角度加强行政
部门对公共资源分配权限及程
序的制度性规定
 在我国的法律制度中，已
经具有了大量的关于有限公共
资源分配的制度性规定，这些
规定也是我国预防腐败的制度
性防线。
第四节：资源可持续利用的产权制度
10
 从行政法的领域而言，已经建立起的关于有限公
共资源分配的法律，主要是2004年1月1日实施的《行
政许可法》。
第四节：资源可持续利用的产权制度
11
 《行政许可法》是我国解决如何规范与控制政府
有限公共资源分配权力的基本法律，也是维护和谐社
会的必要法律保障，其可以大大减少不必要的纷争。
 《行政许可法》对包括公共资源配置在内的行政
许可事项进行严格限制的态度，体现了建设法治政府
所必备的减少规制、放松规制的理念。只对于确属政
府介入的事项，政府才可以设定行政许可，从而促使
政府职能转换和转移，促使政府从“全能政府”向
“有限政府”转换。
第四节：资源可持续利用的产权制度
1
本章要求：
（1）认识资源价值，重新发现资源价值；
 （2）了解、掌握资源价值核算方法；
 （3）结合绿色GDP核算的实证分析，进一步
认知资源价值核算的意义。
第四章 资源核算
主要内容 
 第一节 资源价值观
 第二节 资源核算方法
 第三节 绿色GDP核算实证研究
3
第一节 资源价值观
一、资源价值观的演变
自然价值论
效用价值论
劳动价值论
收益价值论
均衡价值论
4
第一节 资源价值观
一、资源价值观的演变：自然价值论
 
 亚当·斯密认为：从财富结构看，社
会财富由劳动、资本和土地共同创造。
 基于自然伦理理念，资源本身类似于
生命体，具有超越人类生产能力的价值。
 如：来自自然的物质产品，给予人类的创造
想象力，巧夺天工的自然景色等 
5
第一节 资源价值观
一、资源价值观的演变：效用价值论
 
 有用即有价值，有用性决定了价值高低。
从满足人类需求的角度来考察价值；以物品满足
人的需求的能力或人对物品效用的主观心理评价
解释价值。
1960年代前/一般效用论，70年代后/边际效用论
价值高低取决于两个因素：效用；短缺性 
6
第一节 资源价值观
一、资源价值观的演变：效用价值论
 
资源效用VS资源伦理
资源占用者、利用决策者VS资源持续利用
（如公地悲剧，政绩导向的资源过度占用）
资源价值认知的过程性VS资源可持续利用
（如物种保护等）
7
一、资源价值观的演变：劳动价值论
 劳动创造价值，凝结在商品中的无差
别的人类劳动。
亚当·斯密、李嘉图、马克思的发展过程。
资源无价值：纯粹的自然资源不属于人类创造
的劳动产品，没有凝结着人类的劳动，因而它没
有价值，但有价格。VS
资源有价值：虚假的社会价值。
第一节 资源价值观
8
一、资源价值观的演变：收益价值论
 收益决定自然资源的价值，预期收益
的多少决定了自然资源价值高低。
经济收益VS资源公益/遗传等特征
可实现收益VS难以实现或未来的收益
第一节 资源价值观
9
一、资源价值观的演变：均衡价值论
 边际效益决定的需求和边际成本决定
的供给，相互作用，共同决定了均衡价值。
阿尔弗雷德·马歇尔：局部均衡分析的创始者
吸收了边际主义原理和方法
不足：价值与价格没有区分
第一节 资源价值观
10
二、资源价值构成 （1）资源类型
实物型资源价值。包括：土地、水、生
物、矿产、海洋等资源价值。
环境型资源价值。包括：陆生生态系统
、水生生态系统、海洋生态系统等价值。 
第一节 资源价值观
第一节 资源价值观
二、资源价值构成 （2）资源利用
实际使用价值。自然资源投入经济活动
中所直接或间接创造的收益；
选择价值。自然资源的投机价值，如自
然资源储备以及资源用途的多样性等；
存在价值。自然资源系统保护或生物多
样性等。 
第一节 资源价值观
二、资源价值构成 （3）资源服务影响 
对人类的直接影响：如人类健康、气味、能
见度、视觉上的美感等；
对生态系统的影响：如对生产的影响：农业
生产力、林地、渔场；其他影响：如娱乐功
能—捕鱼、狩猎；生物多样性、系统稳定性
对非生命系统的影响:如原材料、土壤、生
产成本以及天气、气候等。
第一节 资源价值观
二、资源价值构成 （4）经济路径
资源服务是通过市场，或那些无法在市场中正常交
易的物品和服务的价值变化来显现他们的影响的；
自然资源价值称为总经济价值（TEV），包括：使
用价值和非使用价值。使用价值包括：直接使用价
值（DUV）、间接使用价值（IUV）、选择价值（OV
）；非使用价值包括：遗赠价值和存在价值；
 TEV=UV+NUV=（DUV+IUV+OV）+（HV+EV）
三、绿色GDP核算
 EDP：绿色GDP，即从现行GDP中扣除环
境资源成本和对环境资源的保护服务费用。
 1993年联合国会同世界银行和国际货币基金组织，
提出了绿色核算体系通用框架—“环境经济综合核算体
系（SEEA）”
。详细说明了将资源耗减、环境保护和环
境退化等问题纳入国民经济核算体系的概念、方法、分
类和基本准则，构建了综合环境经济核算的基本框架。 
第一节 资源价值观
1
本章要求：
掌握资源需求的趋势特征，了解人口、技
术进步等对资源需求的影响；在分析资源
供给状况的基础上总结资源供给的特征，
熟悉资源的自然供给和经济供给问题；学
会分析资源稀缺和可持续发展等问题。
第二章：资源稀缺
2
资源需求包含微观主体需求和区域社会需求两个方面
一、资源需求的概念
1、资源需求是指在一定的时间内，资源需求主体愿
意而且能够购买的资源数量或价值。
2、这里强调资源需求有两个必要条件：
 一是有购买意愿，二是有购买能力。
3、这两个条件必须同时具备才能成为资源需求。
第一节：资源需求
3
二、资源需求的影响因素
1、资源微观主体需求的影响因素：
 （1）资源价格；
（2）收入；
（3）替代资源价格；
（4）消费者偏好；
（5）人们对资源价格的预期。
第一节：资源需求
4
（1）资源价格
 一般来说，资源价格与资源需求之间是反向变动
的关系，即资源价格上涨，资源需求量下降；
 资源价格变化对资源需求变化的影响可以用资源
需求的价格弹性来测度；
 资源需求的价格弹性就是资源需求量变化百分比
与资源价格百分比的比值；
 资源需求的价格弹性越大，资源价格变动对资源
需求的影响就越大；反之，则越小。
第一节：资源需求
5
（2）收入
 一般来说，资源需求与微观主体的购买能力有关，
而购买能力则主要受到收入的影响；
 收入对资源需求的影响程度可以用资源需求的收
入弹性来表示；
 资源需求的收入弹性就是资源需求变化百分比与
收入变化百分比的比值；
 资源需求的收入弹性越大，说明收入变化对资源
需求的影响就越大。
第一节：资源需求
6
（3）替代资源价格
 替代资源价格的提高会增加被替代资源的需求；
 替代资源价格对资源需求的影响可以用交叉价格
弹性来表示；
 资源需求的交叉价格弹性就是指资源需求变化百
分比与替代资源价格变化百分比的比值。
第一节：资源需求
7
（4）消费者偏好
 消费者的偏好主要是受到消费者所处的社会环境的
影响；
 例如，台湾地区居民向西式餐饮的转变使得对大米
需求的减少-“多吃一口饭”
。
（5）人们对资源价格的预期
 当人们预料到某种资源的价格会上涨的时候，会增
加对该种资源的购买量，从而影响资源的需求量。
第一节：资源需求
8
2、资源区域社会需求的影响因素：
资源的区域社会需求可以看作是区域内所有微观经
济主体资源需求的加总。其主要影响因素包括：
 （1）人口数量与结构；
（2）技术水平；
（3）区域产业结构。
第一节：资源需求
9
（1）人口数量与结构
 在一定的消费能力情况下，人口总量多少直接决定
着对区域资源消耗或占用的需求，当然不同的人口
节结构、文化差异等，也将影响资源需求数量。
（2）技术水平
 资源利用技术水平决定了资源利用效率，不同的技
术选择对区域资源需求有着重要的影响。资源利用
技术水平高，则同样的社会经济发展水平下，资源
利用总量相应较低。
第一节：资源需求
10
（3）区域产业结构
 不同产业资源消耗特征不同，不同产业组合形成一
定区域内特定的产业结构，在技术水平保持一定的
情况下，区域产业结构的变化会对资源需求产生重
要的影响。
 例如，重工业产业形态就要比轻工业经济形态有更
大的资源需求。
第一节：资源需求
11
三、资源需求的趋势特征
1、需求总量不断增大，资源形势短缺将日益严峻，
但经济增长的资源边际占用量总体下降；
2、由于资源经济杠杆和技术进步的作用，资源利用
效率将不断提高；
3、随着新能源的开发利用，资源消耗结构将趋向合
理，耗竭资源的压力将有所缓解；
第一节：资源需求
12
4、资源占用与产业结构调整及宏观调控发展态势的
关系日益密切；
5、资源开发利用中的污染问题在较长一段时期内仍
将十分严重；
6、储备型资源占用将呈现增加态势。
第一节：资源需求
1
一、代际公平与资源配置
 代际公平：当代人经济福利不断改善
的同时，保证后代人得到的经济福利不少
于当代人所享受的；
 发展科学；以人的持续生存和发展为
经济发展的最大福利目标，不是为增长而
增长；
 技术替代：增强技术对资源的替代性。
第二节 资源动态最优配置的经济学分析
2
二、效率保障与资源配置
 意大利经济学家维弗雷多·帕累托提
出：假定固有的一群人和可分配的资源，
从一种分配状态到另一种状态的变化中，
在没有使任何人境况变坏的前提下，也不
可能再使某些人的处境变好的资源配置，
即为帕累托最优。
 高鸿业．西方经济学（微观部分）．2011 
第二节 资源动态最优配置的经济学分析
3
三、边际报酬递减与资源配置
 对边际报酬递减的理解
 边际报酬递减 VS
 边际报酬递增递减 
 边际报酬递减与资源配置
 边际资源效率具有动态性；
 资源的平均效率也有最高点；
 资源生产力存在最高点。
第二节 资源动态最优配置的经济学分析
4
L
O L
O
TP
MP AP
TP
AP
MP L1 L2 L3
总产量、边际产量与平均产量的变化过程
第二节 资源动态最优配置的经济学分析
1
 本节将以我国的农地产权为例，阐述农地产权对
农业生产的影响。
权利主体的
目标与行为
(集团、个人)
绩效： 
产出增加
效率提高
成本降低
………
产
权
产权结构与
特定产权形式
相对价格变动
技术变化
偏好、政治参数
环 境
激励约束
外部性内部化
资源配置
产权对资源利用效率的作用途径
第三节：产权与资源利用效率
2
第三节：产权与资源利用效率
一、农地产权的构成
 1、农地使用权
 农地的使用权是行为主体开发利用农地资源的权
利。该项权利的主体既可以是农地所有权人，也可以
是农地所有者以外的行为主体。
 当农地所有者自己开发利用其农地资源时，农地
所有权人同时也是农地使用权人。而当农地所有权人
和使用权人不相一致时，农地产权的转移就产生了。
3
 2、农地转让权
 农地转让权指的是行为主体全部或部分地将其对
农地资源的各项权利让渡给其他人。
 不仅农地所有者将其对农地资源的权利全部或部
分地让渡给他人是农地转让权的体现，而且农地使用
权或是收益权人将其所拥有的相应权利让渡给他人也
是转让权的具体表现。
第三节：产权与资源利用效率
4
 3、农地收益权
 农地收益权是行为主体从相应农地上取得收入的
权利。对于不同的行为主体，农地转让权的自由程度
也是不一样的。有的人可以毫无约束地自由转让其对
农地资源的权利；而有的人却会受到不同程度的限制。 
 不可否认，无论是农地的所有者还是具体的农地
使用人，都有权从各自农地的收益中获得应有的份额。
当然，对应权利程度的强弱也影响着收益权的完整性。
第三节：产权与资源利用效率
5
二、农地产权对农业绩效的影响
 1、农地使用权对农业绩效的影响
 农地利用的微观行为主体是个体农民或农户，他
们要成为独立的商品生产者获取持久的经济激励就必
须以拥有稳定的对土地的专有使用权为前提。
 目前，我国对农地使用权的规定是“承包期30年
不变”
，这相当于给农民吃了一颗定心丸，有利于农
户增加投入，获取持续稳定的农地产出收益。
第三节：产权与资源利用效率
6
 2、农地转让权对农业绩效的影响
 一是通过市场手段形成对土地的规模经营，它可
以解决中国农村地块分散、效益低下的弊端，也有利
于先进的农业机械发挥更大的作用，使农民真正感受
到技术进步带来的收益。
 二是会促使越来越多的高效、具有活力的农户从
那些农地经营效率较差的农户，以及那些想退出农业
活动、希望增加额外收入的承包权人手中获得土地，
从而实现土地与资金、土地与劳动力的优化配置，并
最终提高农地产出效率。
第三节：产权与资源利用效率
7
 3、农地收益权对农业绩效的影响
 对于农民来讲，农地利用的根本目的在于从这一
经济活动中获得收益来满足自己的需要。所以，对土
地收益权的拥有及通过收益权实现收益的最大化是农
民最基本的生产动力和经济目标。
 目前，我国已取消了对农业税的征收，使农民拥
有了更为完整的农地收益权，这无疑将大大激励农民
的农业生产活动。
第三节：产权与资源利用效率
